 
Document of 
The World Bank 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
 
Report No: PAD1592 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT 
 
ON A 
 
PROPOSED GRANT 
 
FROM THE SOMALIA MULTI-PARTNER FUND 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF 
US$6 MILLION  
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
 
FOR A 
 
Special Financing Facility for Local Development Project 
 
January 6, 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice 
Africa Region 
 
 
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the 
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World 
Bank authorization.  
 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
i 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
 
(Exchange Rate Effective December 18, 2015) 
 
Currency Unit = Somali Shilling 
Somali Shilling 588.2 = US$1 
  
 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 
– 
December 31 
AFS 
Annual Financial Statement 
AMISOM 
AO 
African Union Mission to Somalia 
Administrative Officer 
CBS 
Central Bank of Somalia 
CO 
Communications Officer 
CQS 
Selection Based on Consultant’s Qualifications 
DA 
Designated Account 
DPC 
Deputy Project Coordinator 
DSC 
Design and Supervision Consultant 
E&S 
Environmental and Social 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
ESAP 
Environmental and Social Action Plan 
ESIA 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
ESMP 
Environmental and Social management plan 
FBS 
Selection under a Fixed Budget 
FCS 
Fragile and Conflict-affected Situations 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMS 
Financial Management Specialist 
FO 
Financial Officer 
GoN 
Government of Norway 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service 
ICB 
IDA 
International Competitive Bidding 
International Development Association 
IFR 
Interim Financial Report 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
IPC 
Interim Payment Certificate 
IPSAS 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards 
IRA 
Interim Regional Administration 
ISN 
Interim Strategy Note  
JNA 
Joint Needs Assessment 
JPLG 
Joint Program on Local Governance and Decentralized Service 
Delivery 
LCS 
Least-Cost Selection 
MA 
Monitoring Agent  
MEO 
Monitoring and Evaluation Officer 
ii 
 
MoF 
Ministry of Finance  
MoI 
Ministry of Interior and Federalism 
MPF 
Multi-Partner Fund 
PAD 
Project Appraisal Document 
PAP 
Project-affected People 
PC 
Project Coordinator 
PDO 
Project Development Objective  
PFM 
Public Financial Management 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PO 
Procurement Officer 
POM 
Project Operational Manual 
PSG 
QBS 
Peace- and State-building Goal 
Quality-Based Selection 
QCBS 
Quality- and Cost-Based Selection 
RAP 
Resettlement Action Plan 
SAI 
Supreme Audit Institution 
SC 
Steering Committee 
SDRF 
Somalia Reconstruction and Development Facility  
SFF 
Special Financing Facility 
SFF-LD 
Special Financing Facility for Local Development 
SFMIS 
Somali Financial Management Information System 
SoE 
Statement of Expenditures 
SoP 
Series of Projects  
SORT 
Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool 
SSF 
Somalia Stability Fund 
SSS 
Single-Source Selection 
TIS 
Transition Initiatives for Stabilization 
TIU 
Temporary Implementation Unit 
ToR 
Terms of Reference 
UN 
United Nations 
USAID 
United States Agency for International Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President:  
Makhtar Diop 
Country Director:  
Bella Bird 
Senior Global Practice Director:  
Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
Practice Manager:  
Idrissa Dia 
Task Team Leader:  
Dean Cira 
Co-Task Team Leader:  
Bernard Harborne 
iii 
 
SOMALIA 
Special Financing Facility for Local Development (SFFLD)  
(P156257) 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ................................................................................... 1 
A. Country Context ............................................................................................... 1 
B. Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints .................. 2 
C. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................... 2 
D. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes ............................. 5 
II. 
PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES ........                                           5 
A. PDO.................................................................................................................. 5 
B. Project Beneficiaries ........................................................................................ 5 
C. PDO Level Results Indicators .......................................................................... 6 
III. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION ................................................................................ 6 
A. Project Components ......................................................................................... 6 
B. Project Financing ............................................................................................. 8 
C. Series of Project Objective and Phases ............................................................ 9 
D. Lessons Learned Reflected in the Project Design............................................ 9 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION ....................................................................................... 11 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ........................................... 11 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation ............................................................... 13 
C. Sustainability.................................................................................................. 13 
V. 
KEY RISKS ........................................................................................................ 14 
A. Overall Risk Rating and Explanation of Key Risks....................................... 14 
VI. 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................ 16 
A. Economic and Financial Analysis .................................................................. 16 
B. Technical ........................................................................................................ 16 
C. Financial Management ................................................................................... 17 
D. Procurement ................................................................................................... 17 
E. Social (including Safeguards) ........................................................................ 18 
F. Environment (including Safeguards) ............................................................. 19 
G. Other Safeguards Policies Triggered ............................................................. 20 
H. World Bank Grievance Redress ..................................................................... 20 
iv 
 
Annex 1: Results Framework and Monitoring ........................................................... 21 
Annex 2: Detailed Project Description ......................................................................... 27 
Annex 3: Implementation Arrangements .................................................................... 33 
Annex 4: Implementation Support Plan ...................................................................... 55 
Annex 5: Systematic Operational Risk-Rating Tool................................................... 58 
Annex 6: Environmental and Social Action Plan ....................................................... 66 
Annex 7: MAP ................................................................................................................ 90
vi 
 
 
PAD DATA SHEET 
Somalia 
Special Financing Facility for Local Development Project (P156257) 
Report No.: PAD1592 
Basic Information  
Project ID 
EA Category 
Team Leader(s) 
P156257 
B - Partial Assessment 
Dean A. Cira, Bernard Harborne 
Lending Instrument 
Fragile and/or Capacity Constraints [ X ] 
Investment Project Financing 
- Fragile States 
- Post-Conflict 
 
Financial Intermediaries [   ] 
 
Series of Projects [ X ] 
Project Implementation Start Date 
Project Implementation End Date 
15-Jan-2016 
30-Apr-2018 
Expected Effectiveness Date 
Expected Closing Date 
15-Jan-2016 
31-Dec-2017 
Joint IFC - No 
 
 
 
 
 
Practice 
Manager/Manager 
Senior Global Practice 
Director 
Country Director 
Regional Vice President 
Idrissa Dia 
Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez Bella Bird 
Makhtar Diop 
Approval Authority 
For projects financed from the Somalia Multi-Partner Fund, the final approving authority rests with the 
Africa Regional Vice President. Approval is expected January 6, 2016. 
Borrower: Federal Republic of Somalia  
Responsible Agency: Ministry of Finance 
  Contact: 
Ali Haji Aden 
  Title: 
Head of PIU 
  Telephone No.: 252617219999 
  Email: mofsffpiu@gmail.com 
Safeguards Deferral (from Decision Review Decision Note)  
Will the review of Safeguards be deferred?  [ X ]  Yes     [   ]   No 
Project Financing Data(in USD Million) 
[   ] 
Loan 
[   ] 
IDA Grant [   ] 
Guarantee 
[   ] 
Credit [ X ] 
Grant 
[   ] 
Other 
Total Project Cost: 
6.00 
Total Bank Financing: 
0.00 
Financing Gap: 
0.00 
 
vii 
 
Financing Source 
Amount 
Borrower 
0.00 
Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
6.00 
Total 
6.00 
Expected Disbursements (in USD Million) 
Fiscal Year 2016 2017 
2018 
0000 
0000 
0000 
0000 
0000 
0000 
0000 
Annual 
3.00 3.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
Cumulative 3.00 6.00 
6.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
Institutional Data 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice 
Contributing Practice Areas - None 
Cross Cutting Topics 
[   ] 
Climate Change 
[ X ] 
Fragile, Conflict & Violence 
[   ] 
Gender 
[ X ] 
Jobs 
[   ] 
Public Private Partnership 
Sectors / Climate Change 
Sector (Maximum 5 and total % must equal 100) 
Major Sector 
Sector 
% 
Adaptation 
Co-benefits % 
Mitigation 
Co-benefits % 
Public Administration, Law, and 
Justice 
Sub-national government 
administration 
50 
 
 
Public Administration, Law, and 
Justice 
General public 
administration sector 
50 
 
 
Total 
100 
 I certify that there is no Adaptation and Mitigation Climate Change Co-benefits information 
applicable to this project. 
Themes 
Theme (Maximum 5 and total % must equal 100) 
Major theme 
Theme 
% 
Social dev/gender/inclusion 
Conflict prevention and post-conflict 
reconstruction 
20 
Social dev/gender/inclusion 
Participation and civic engagement 
20 
Public sector governance 
Decentralization 
20 
Urban development 
City-wide Infrastructure and Service 
Delivery 
20 
viii 
 
Rural development 
Rural services and infrastructure 
20 
Total 
100 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
To support the construction and reconstruction of infrastructure and the development of public service 
delivery capacity in targeted areas of Somalia and support the Federal Government and Regional 
Administrations’ capacity to respond to an eligible crisis or emergency. 
Components 
Component Name 
Cost (USD Millions) 
Small-Scale Infrastructure 
3.90 
Program Operations, Capacity Building, and Contingencies 
2.10 
Emergency Contingency Component 
0.00 
Systematic Operations Risk- Rating Tool (SORT) 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
High 
2. Macroeconomic 
Substantial 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
Substantial 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
Moderate 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
Substantial 
6. Fiduciary 
High 
7. Environment and Social 
Moderate 
8. Stakeholders 
Substantial 
9. Security 
High 
OVERALL 
High 
Compliance  
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CAS in content or in other significant 
respects? 
Yes [   ] 
No [ X ] 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies? 
Yes [   ] 
No [ X ] 
Have these been approved by Bank management? 
Yes [   ] 
No [   ] 
Is approval for any policy waiver sought from the Board? 
Yes [   ] 
No [ X ] 
Does the project meet the Regional criteria for readiness for implementation? 
Yes [ X ] 
No [   ] 
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project 
Yes 
No 
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 
X 
 
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 
 
X 
Forests OP/BP 4.36 
 
X 
Pest Management OP 4.09 
 
X 
ix 
 
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 
 
X 
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 
 
X 
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 
 
X 
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 
 
X 
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 
 
X 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 
 
X 
Legal Covenants 
Name 
Recurrent 
Due Date 
Frequency 
Hiring of Project Implementation Unit 
Staff 
 
15-Apr-2016 
 
Description of Covenant 
Within three months of the effectiveness date, the Project Implementation Unit shall be fully staffed with 
a Project Coordinator, a Deputy Project Coordinator, at least one Engineer, a Procurement Specialist, a 
Financial Management Specialist, a Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist, a Communications Specialist, 
and an Administration Officer. 
Name 
Recurrent 
Due Date 
Frequency 
Immediate Response Mechanism 
 
30-Jun-2016 
 
Description of Covenant 
The Recipient shall, prior to implementation of the Immediate Response Mechanism: (a) prepare and 
furnish to the World Bank for its review and approval an operations manual which shall set forth 
detailed implementation arrangements for the Immediate Response Mechanism. 
Name 
Recurrent 
Due Date 
Frequency 
Development of a Project Operations 
Manual 
 
15-Apr-2016 
 
Description of Covenant 
Within three months of the effective date the Project Operations Manual will be finalized and adopted by 
the Project Steering Committee. 
Name 
Recurrent 
Due Date 
Frequency 
A Project Steering Committee 
 
15-Mar-2016 
 
Description of Covenant 
The Recipient shall establish not later than sixty (60) days after the Effective Date and thereafter 
maintain throughout project implementation, a Project Steering Committee with terms of reference 
satisfactory to the World Bank and with adequate resources to carry out its functions. 
Conditions 
Source Of Fund 
Name 
Type 
 
 
 
Description of Condition 
None 
 
 
x 
 
Team Composition 
Bank Staff 
Name 
Role 
Title 
Specialization 
Unit 
Dean A. Cira 
Team Leader (ADM 
Responsible) 
Lead Urban 
Specialist 
 
GSU19 
Bernard Harborne 
Team Leader 
Lead Social 
Development 
Specialist 
 
GSUGL 
John F. A Etidau 
Procurement 
Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Consultant 
 
GGODR 
Leonard Mutuku Matheka 
Financial 
Management 
Specialist 
Consultant 
 
GGODR 
Diego Garrido Martin 
Team Member 
Senior Operations 
Officer 
 
GCFDR 
Edith Ruguru Mwenda 
Counsel 
Senior Counsel 
Counsel 
LEGAM 
Geoff Handley 
Team Member 
E T Consultant 
 
GGO19 
Ibrahim Khalil Dajani 
Peer Reviewer 
Senior Infrastructure 
Specialist 
 
GTI05 
Janerose Muboka Lubisia 
Team Member 
Team Assistant 
 
AFMSO 
Joseph A. Gadek 
Team Member 
Consultant 
 
GSU13 
Matthias Mayr 
Team Member 
Consultant 
 
AFMSO 
Salome Awuor Aganda 
Team Member 
E T Temporary 
 
AFMSO 
Sean Bradley 
Peer Reviewer 
Lead Social 
Development 
Specialist 
 
GSUGL 
Stavros George Stavrou 
Peer Reviewer 
Senior Social 
Development 
Specialist 
 
GSU07 
Stephen Mugendi 
Mukaindo 
Counsel 
Counsel 
 
LEGAM 
Verena Phipps-Ebeler 
Safeguards Specialist Social Development 
Specialist 
Social Safeguards 
and Gender 
GSU07 
Wolfhart Pohl 
Safeguards Specialist Adviser 
 
GCFDR 
Zishan Faiza Karim 
Team Member 
Social Development 
Specialist 
Social Development 
GSU19 
Extended Team 
Name 
Title 
Office Phone 
Location 
Locations 
Country 
First Administrative 
Division 
Location 
Planned 
Actual 
Comments 
Consultants (Will be disclosed in the Monthly Operational Summary) 
Consultants Required ? 
Consultants will be required 
 
1 
 
I. 
A. Country Context 
1. 
Somalia is a fragile and conflict-affected country emerging from violent contestation and 
the absence of formal state structures capable of effectively performing core state functions. 
Basic social and economic indicators illustrate that Somalia has low standards of living, a low 
level of human capital, and a severe lack of basic infrastructure and enabling services. An 
estimated 43 percent of Somalia’s population, of an estimated 12.4 million, is living in extreme 
poverty. The gross national income per capita of US$284 is one of the lowest in the world. 
Approximately 70 percent of the population has yet to reach the age of 30 and a large proportion 
of youth lack basic education and employment opportunities.  
2. 
After two decades of civil war, Somalia’s future remains on a challenging but more 
positive trajectory. The election of President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud by an appointed Somali 
parliament in August 2012 and the inauguration of the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) 
offered a new beginning. This has been coupled with international recognition and gradual 
normalization with the Bretton Woods institutions. The FGS’ Vision 2016 document anticipates 
the completion of the constitutional process, the settlement of federal relations between the 
center and the regions, and the holding of national legislative and executive elections by end of 
2016.  
3. 
Yet the political ‘coalition-building’ process remains fragile. The FGS itself has been 
beset by internal political conflict; there have been three prime ministers, each with their 
respective cabinets in the last three years. Federal state entities, so-called “interim regional 
administrations” (IRAs), are emerging; however their relationship, and that of Puntland (an 
administration in the north established in 1998), with the central FGS remains fraught with issues 
such as natural resources and revenue sharing. In turn, the relationship with Somaliland, the self-
declared independent state in the northwest, remains to be settled.  
4. 
In addition, the FGS faces the related challenge of the Al Shabaab insurgency, 
particularly affecting southern and central Somalia, and also Puntland. In support of the FGS, the 
African Union has launched a large peacekeeping mission, AMISOM,1 now comprising 22,000 
troops, which has, in conjunction with Somali national forces, gradually taken over territory once 
controlled by Al Shabaab. The insurgents, still present in many rural areas in southern Somalia, 
have changed tactics using hit-and-run assaults against AMISOM forces as well as terrorist 
attacks particularly in urban areas, notably the capital Mogadishu, against the FGS and 
international partners.  
5. 
The contested political process between federal and regional institutions, the protracted 
insurgency led by Al Shabaab, and the limited reach of the government outside of the capital 
reduce the visibility and impact of government-led development programs. The legitimacy of the 
FGS is therefore severely challenged, as capacities to establish it are lacking on most fronts. The 
transition process will not only depend on the ability of the political actors to put in place a 
                                                 
1 African Union Mission in Somalia 
2 
 
viable and effective state-society compact but also on the ability of the emerging government 
structures to demonstrate their capacity as service providers and delivery agents.  
B. Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints  
6. This Special Financing Facility for Local Development (SFF-LD) operation is being 
processed using condensed procedures as provided for in the Bank’s OP 10.00. Paragraph 12 of 
OP 10.00 (Projects in Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints) can be 
triggered because of conflict as well as capacity constraints due to fragility. Condensed 
procedures allow for (a) the stages of identification, preparation, and appraisal to be consolidated 
and (b) the decision to authorize negotiations to be taken after a single consolidated review of a 
complete negotiations package. 
 
7. In the Somali context, there is an active armed conflict between the FGS forces and its allies, 
supported by AMISOM and international partners, and Al Shabaab. A combination of this 
insurgency and decades of conflict has resulted in around 3 million persons in need of 
humanitarian assistance, including over 1.1 million internally displaced persons. Further, given 
the historical context, Somalia confronts critical capacity constraints with nascent formal public 
institutions beset by weak human and financial resourcing and perceptions of fraud and 
corruption. 
C. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
8. 
The 2011 World Development Report on Conflict, Security and Development highlights 
the need for governments in unstable situations to establish political ‘legitimacy’ by delivering 
concrete outcomes as ‘signals of future intent,’ or demonstrations of a new and better 
government narrative. Soon after the creation of the FGS in September 2012, it was agreed 
between the Government of Norway (GoN) and the FGS presidency that two important ‘signals’ 
in the early life of the FGS would be the regular payment of civil service salaries and an ability 
to design, procure, and implement simple projects of value to local communities. In each case, 
this would be the first time that any central government had managed to do such an activity in a 
generation. Consequently, in December 2012, the GoN pledged US$30 million as a grant to the 
Special Financing Facility (SFF), a project mechanism to be established within the Ministry of 
Finance (MoF), to pay civil servants as well as manage a number of small-capital investment 
projects for the regions. 
9. 
During this same period, AMISOM started an offensive campaign against Al Shabaab, 
forcing the group out of many urban areas in southern and central Somalia. Critical for the 
success of this campaign was the ability of the FGS and its partners to come in behind military 
forces and start providing essential security, justice, governance, and basic social services. 
International donors provide about US$50 million per year through various modalities in support 
of these recovery and stabilization efforts in these areas (above and beyond humanitarian 
assistance). In early 2014, the FGS’ Ministry of Interior and Federalism (MoI) established a 
Stabilization Strategy for Newly Accessible Areas as part of an attempt to better coordinate 
donor interventions in the recovery effort. Among the different initiatives supporting recovery, 
the only project providing service delivery and small project assistance through government 
systems was the SFF.  
3 
 
10. 
The other important political change since the original design of the SFF-Norway has 
been the emergence of the IRAs. Subproject allocations under the SFF-Norway had been made 
equitably according to the 18 administrative regions designated (pre-1991) under the Siad Barre 
regime (minus the 5 regions that comprise Somaliland). As part of the federal constitutional 
process initiated in 2012, local elite-based coalitions have been formed with the intention of 
forming the ‘federal member states’ that comprise the Federal Republic of Somalia upon a final 
political settlement. To this end, the Interim Juba Administration was established in May 2013, 
the Interim South West Administration in November 2014, and the Galmudug Interim 
Administration in June 2015. These administrations remain institutionally very weak and provide 
little more than rudimentary security and justice for the local populations. However, as part of 
the political process, their ambition is to take on (as yet undefined) roles and responsibilities 
under the new state formation. 
11. 
An illustration of these newly formed IRAs is set out in the map below (note that Hiraan 
and Middle Shabelle have yet to be formed as an IRA).  
Map 1 IRAs in Somalia 
 
 
12.    In these areas, local communities confront enormous humanitarian and development 
challenges. Nearly 1.7 million children lack access to education, 3.2 million persons lack access 
to regular health services and around 2.75 million are in need of regular access to safe water (as 
estimated by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)).  
4 
 
13.     Only about 10–15 percent of the 2,600 km of primary roads are in good condition and less 
than 10 percent of the 19,200 km of secondary roads are in good condition. Basic infrastructure 
has been devastated by war damage, vandalism, and neglect. A joint needs assessment (JNA) 
undertaken by the Bank and the United Nations (UN) in 2006 and updated in 2011, estimated 
that some US$1.12 billion was required for immediate priorities in the transport and urban 
infrastructure sectors.  
 
14. 
In late 2014, the GoN approached the Bank requesting support to review the progress of 
the SFF-Norway with the potential to take over the management of the small-projects window 
(the Bank has taken over the payment of civil service salaries with its Recurrent Costs Project in 
August 2014). In February 2014, a Bank team assessed the SFF-Norway as well as the broader 
efforts of international partners to support recovery and stabilization in southern and central 
Somalia. In discussions arising out of that review, it was agreed between the FGS, the GoN, and 
the Bank that the latter would seek financing through the Multi-Partner Fund (MPF) to take over 
the SFF-Norway by the end of calendar 2015.  
15. 
Given the volatile security context as well as the institutional concerns over governance 
and accountability, the decision was for a small ‘pilot phase’ to start the Bank engagement, with 
the potential for this to be scaled up subject to achieving results and securing additional trust 
funding from donors. As a series of projects (SoP), this initial grant will invest in ‘learning-by-
doing’ with particular focus on investing in project implementation capacity in such areas as 
citizen participation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and safeguards.  
16. 
Transitioning the SFF-Norway as the SFF-LD, a Bank-financed project implemented 
through the FGS’ MoF is in line with the general objectives of the Somalia Reconstruction and 
Development Facility (SDRF) and the multi-donor trust fund, the MPF, established to part-
finance the SDRF. These objectives are also reflected in the Bank’s Interim Strategy Note (ISN) 
for Somalia for FY14–16. The ISN (discussed at the Board on November 11, 2013) has two 
priority areas: (a) strengthening core economic institutions and (b) expanding economic 
opportunity. The ISN aligns the Bank’s work fully within the New Deal Framework of the 
Somali Compact that is committed to key peace and state-building goals necessary to address the 
binding constraints to poverty reduction in Somalia.  
17. 
The rationale for the SFF-LD is that (a) it continues to support the building of legitimate 
public sector institutions by using government systems and demonstrating they can work; (b) 
being housed within the MoF, it will play a critical role in helping define the division of roles, 
responsibilities, and capacities between the central government and the states in the area of 
development financing; (c) it begins to rebalance Bank support between the center and regions; 
and (d) it supports recovery efforts for vulnerable populations in the most war-affected parts of 
Somali territory. 
18. 
The SFF-LD will complement the current Bank program. Considerable resources have 
been invested in the federal government public sector, strengthening public financial 
management (PFM), institutional capacity, and payment of recurrent costs. While working 
through the central FGS’ MoF, the SFF-LD will also start supporting the project implementation 
capacity of the newly emerging IRAs. In turn, where the Somali Urban Project (anticipated 
US$80 million) will invest in three main cities (Mogadishu, Garowe, and Hargeisa), the SFF-LD 
5 
 
will invest in secondary cities. Finally, the SFF-LD will be an important instrument for the FGS 
in its coordination with other multi-partner programs led by bilateral institutions who are 
financing stabilization and recovery activities in the south.2 
D. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes 
19.      The strategic outcome is to strengthen state legitimacy and government effectiveness in 
peripheral areas while improving local governance and supporting economic recovery through 
the construction and reconstruction of small-scale public infrastructure. The SFF-LD will also 
provide for an integration of existing stabilization efforts throughout Somalia towards a stronger 
link between ongoing government-supported security operations and government-led recovery 
and development programming. In turn, strengthening federal-regional state relations is 
important to retain the momentum towards the establishment of effective and capable 
administration at all levels of government. The Project will also support the Bank’s twin goals of 
eliminating extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity. Somalia is one of the poorest 
countries in the world with more than 70 percent of the population living in poverty and 43 
percent living in extreme poverty. The Project will benefit these marginalized populations by 
improving services and creating short-term employment opportunities. 
 
II. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES 
A. PDO 
20.      The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to support the construction and 
reconstruction of infrastructure and the development of public service delivery capacity in 
targeted areas of Somalia and support the Federal Government and Regional Administrations’ 
capacity to respond to an eligible crisis or emergency.  
 
B. Project Beneficiaries 
21.     To date, the SFF-Norway has financed 10 sub-projects in the three (pre-1991) regions of 
Benadir, Hiraan, and Galgaduud. Typical sub-projects have included reconstruction of 
administrative buildings, new markets, road improvements and street lighting which have 
benefited the populations of those regions. In addition to the beneficiaries of the infrastructure 
there have been more than 2,200 people benefiting from short-term job opportunities resulting 
from the implementation of the sub-projects.  
 
22.     The proposed SFF-LD will finance similar sub-projects, scaling-up eventually to all 
regions. During the first phase of the proposed project it is estimated that sub-projects will be 
financed in five regions benefitting more than 1 million people in the targeted regions through 
the different types of infrastructure.  In addition, the project will benefit (a) the federal and 
interim regional authorities through capacity building and by helping to strengthen their 
                                                 
2 These include the multi-donor UN Joint Program on Local Governance and Decentralized Service Delivery 
(JPLG); the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) funded Transition Initiatives for 
Stabilization (TIS); the multi-donor Community-Driven Recovery and Development program; and the multi-donor 
Somalia Stability Fund (SSF). 
6 
 
legitimacy, and (b) around 2000 people who will get access to short term job opportunities 
resulting from the implementation of the sub-projects. 
 
C. PDO Level Results Indicators 
23. 
A set of indictors have been identified to capture all the elements mentioned in the PDO. 
These PDO indicators will allow to assess the success of the project by the time of closure.  
(a) Financed subprojects that are functioning/delivering services to communities three 
months after completion (number);  
(b) Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female (percentage); 
(c) Subprojects for which community or local authority engagement in post-project 
sustainability and/or operations and maintenance (O&M) plan is established 
(number);  
(d) Perceptions of regional administrations or federal government performance on 
subproject activity (percentage); 
(e) Beneficiaries under the activated crisis response component (number). 
 
III. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
A. Project Components 
24.    Three components are proposed for the SFF-LD for a duration of 24 months. 
Component 1: Small-scale Infrastructure (US$3.9 million)  
25. 
This component will finance small-scale local development activities in the pre-1991 
regions of the FGS. The grant amounts to each region will continue the previous approach of 
distribution following an ‘equal shares’ basis of US$700,000–750,000 per region. The grants 
will cover design and supervision costs and the costs of implementation of the works or 
activities. Following a process of consultation with the regions, projects will be identified and 
agreed, based upon a positive list of potential subprojects. The positive list will be reviewed on a 
rolling basis every six months. 
26. 
Eligible subprojects will include the following: 
(a) Buildings: Construction or repair of administrative and community buildings 
(b) Sanitation: Provision or repair of public sanitation facilities in primary health care or 
education facilities where water supply is already available 
7 
 
(c) Roads: Rehabilitation of local roads (using labor intensive methods only), 
construction or rehabilitation of foot paths, culverts, and bridges, including street 
lights 
(d) Health: Construction, repair, or extension of primary health care centers only in cases 
where a health care worker is already present 
(e) Education: Construction, repair, or extension of existing primary schools where a 
teacher is already present and purchase of furniture or equipment for existing primary 
schools 
(f) Markets: Construction or repair of public markets 
(g) Livestock: Construction or rehabilitation of livestock dips 
(h) Energy: Small-scale, off-grid renewable energy projects (for example, street lights, 
energy for public buildings, and markets) 
Component 2: Program Operations and Capacity Building (US$2.10 million)  
 
27. 
This component will finance costs associated with overall project implementation and 
additional capacity-building activities that will support the strengthening of the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU), the proposed new name of the Temporary Implementation Unit 
(TIU), and the new emerging IRAs. This will have two subcomponents:   
(a) PIU Operating Costs. This will cover the costs of PIU staff for a period of two years 
and day-to-day operations, including the salaries and allowances of the PIU members, 
consultancies required for technical assistance, project officers at the subnational 
level and associated costs with the running of the PIU including, among others, office 
running costs, program-related travel expenses, meetings costs, and project 
assessment and monitoring costs. An annual work plan will be agreed between the 
PIU and the Bank to establish the parameters of the costs and activities to be financed 
under this subcomponent. 
(b) Capacity Building. Technical assistance and capacity building will include 
workshops, training, advisory services and learning-by-doing and will focus on 
practical aspects of capital investment project management. Targeted audiences will 
be the FGS ministries as well as IRAs. Capacity building will focus on areas 
including M&E, communications and community outreach, and environmental and 
social (E&S) safeguards. Capacity building will include both central and regional 
stakeholders and will include both hands-on assistance as well as workshops aimed at 
building capacity in these areas. 
Component 3: Contingency Emergency Response (US$0) 
 
28. 
This component will allow for project funds to be used to address emergency works or 
activities resulting from potential natural disasters. Somalia is routinely affected by natural 
disasters, including drought and flooding. If such conditions rise to a critical level (as determined 
8 
 
by the FGS) during the implementation of the project, funds can potentially be allocated for 
emergency works or activities resulting from such natural disasters. Subprojects or activities 
supported under this component will be approved by the Steering Committee (SC). This 
component will be similar to contingent components routinely included in IDA-funded projects; 
the Project Operational Manual (POM) will outline the specific ‘emergency eligibility’ criteria 
for triggering this component. 
B. Project Financing 
29.    While the Series of Projects is anticipated to have a notional overall financing envelope of 
US$25 million from the MPF and will be implemented over a period of five to seven years, this 
first pilot phase will be a total MPF funding of US$6 million, in two separate grants of US$4 
million and US$2 million (due to the timing of donor contributions to the MPF) comprising three 
components implemented over a period of two years.  
30. 
The SFF-LD will allocate US$6 million according to the system established by the MoF 
for SFF-Norway: on an ‘equal shares’ approach ($700,000 per region) following the old pre-
1991 administrative regions and complete the cycle of the 13 (out of a total of 18) regions that 
comprise southern and central Somalia and Puntland. As the project scales up and responds to 
the changing political context, the Bank and the MoF will have to assess how to potentially 
cohere the SFF-LD with the new IRAs in terms of (a) equitable allocations and (b) project 
identification, implementation, and oversight capacity. 
31. 
Other partners planning to support the TIU include the UN Resident Coordinator’s 
Office, who are planning to finance projects for US$2 million. The UN prefers to finance 
projects in Lower Jubba and either Mudug or Gedo. These investments will follow the PIU POM 
and be aligned with processes agreed under this Project Appraisal Document (PAD). The initial 
World Bank funding and the UN funding will together finance projects in Bay, Middle Shabelle, 
Lower Jubba, Benadir, Lower Shabelle, Nugal and Bakool.  Subsequent funding rounds will 
finance projects in remaining regions before recycling to regions covered in previous rounds. 
Table 1: Phasing of SFF Projects by Region  
(showing the continuity of allocations from SFF-Norway to SFF-LD) 
 
Regions Covered 
under SFF-Norway 
 
 
Proposed First Set of 
Regions under SFF-LD 
Pilot Phase 
 
Proposed Second Set of 
Regions under SFF-LD Pilot 
Phase 
 
Proposed for 
Subsequent Funding 
Round 
Region 
Budget 
in US$ 
Region 
Budget in 
US$ 
Region 
Budget in 
US$ 
Region 
Budget 
in US$ 
Benadir 
700,000 
Bay 
700,000 
Lower 
Shebelle 
700,000 
Mudug 
700,000 
Hiraan 
750,000 
Middle 
Shabelle 
700,000 
Nugal 
700,000 
Gedo 
700,000 
Galgaduud 
750,000 
Lower 
Jubba 
700,000 
Bakool 
700,000 
Bari 
700,000 
– 
– 
Benadir 
300,000 
– 
– 
Middle 
Jubba 
700,000 
TOTAL 
2,200,000 
 
2,400,000 
 
2,100,000 
 
2,800,000 
 
9 
 
32. 
By way of background, the SFF-Norway project budget was initially allocated a total of 
US$10 million, distributed on an ‘equal shares’ basis of US$750,0003 for each of the 13 pre-
1991 administrative regions. The SFF-Norway initially envisaged that the sub-projects would be 
rolled out in four phases on a region-by-region basis, to give the TIU the opportunity to go 
through a complete project cycle and gain the experience required for effective project 
implementation (see Table 1). Phase I has focused on Hiraan, Galgaduud, and Benadir. This 
selection was justified by the TIU on grounds of security, accessibility, and cross-clan 
representation. Resource constraints meant that the TIU has not proceeded through the phases as 
rapidly as planned; subprojects under Phase I of the SFF-Norway were completed at end of 2015.  
33. 
The project cost components, categories, and allocations are outlined below (does not 
include the US$2 million UN contribution; and residual funds have been added to component 1). 
Project Components 
Project Cost 
US$ millions 
MPF Financing 
US$ millions 
% Financing 
1. Small-scale Regional Infrastructure 
2. Program Operations and Capacity 
Building 
3. Contingency Emergency Response 
3.90 
 
2.10 
 
– 
3.90 
 
2.10 
 
– 
100 
 
100 
 
– 
Subtotal Project Costs 
Total Financing Required 
6.00 
6.00 
6.00 
6.00 
100 
100 
 
C. Series of Project Objective and Phases 
34. 
The SFF-LD project is part of a SoP approach to prepare a time-series of projects 
supporting the client’s long-term development program, building on the lessons learned and 
achievements from previous projects in the series supporting a complex combination of long-
term investment activities along institutional changes, with needed flexibility in implementation. 
The SoP supports the strategic objectives of the Somalia ISN (FY2014–2016) and the Somalia 
MPF that is designed to serve Somalia for 10 years on progressing economic development and 
strengthening core economic institutions. It is anticipated that future funding of follow-on 
projects will be at least US$25 million. This pilot phase will include the signing of two Grant 
Agreements:  one in the first year of implementation for US$4 million and one in the second year 
for US$2 million. 
D. Lessons Learned Reflected in the Project Design 
35.    The SFF-LD represents a new type of investment for the Bank in Somalia as it is aimed at 
financing activities in southern and central Somalia, well outside the confines of the capital city 
Mogadishu. In designing the SFF-LD, the team has therefore looked at lessons elsewhere such 
as: (a) the World Bank Post-Conflict Fund financed Community Development and Recovery 
program in northern Somalia in the 2000s; (b) World Bank and other donor programs in conflict-
settings; and (c) relevant policy and academic literature.  
 
                                                 
3 Note the sub-grant amount under the SFF-LD has been reduced to $700,000 to ensure adequate coverage.  
10 
 
36.   There is a tension between the pressures to rapidly intervene against taking time to 
ensure participatory processes. The project is starting small with a view to scale-up but will 
face some pressure to ensure rapid and regular disbursements. At the same time, there is a 
consultation process with local communities and local authorities during which projects are 
identified. However, these consultation processes will need to be strengthened over time to 
ensure active participation, particularly from marginalized groups, and allow for robust 
accountability mechanisms. 
 
37. 
There is a need to start area by area and region by region with a gradual scaling-up 
to achieve economies of scale. The most cost-efficient approach to infrastructure development 
in Somalia will be to tender for service providers to undertake a whole number of projects at one 
time to achieve economies of scale. However, this does not necessarily accord with the current 
sociopolitical context whereby the project will have to take local clan and other dimensions into 
account. This will result in the potential for economies of scale in having service providers 
working across regions only in later phases of the project; hence, the proposal for a SoP subject 
to resources. 
38. 
Externally financed projects must be informed by close contextual knowledge, 
building off existing platforms of collective action (particularly found in urban areas) and 
sustained over time. Large infusions of project funding with short time horizons have tended to 
be self-defeating. War has changed the population; collective action can be difficult and trust, 
particularly with public sector institutions, has been damaged. However, there are many 
examples4 of successful governance arrangements and cross-clan and group collective action, 
particularly at the municipal level in urban areas. Resources will be allocated to the project 
buying-in M&E expertise to enhance the learning aspect of the project; in addition, the Bank 
team will be able to call upon the services of the independent monitoring agent (MA) for data 
and analysis in the impact of project delivery. 
39. 
The public sector inevitably takes the lead in post-conflict environments with a slow 
buildup of private sector growth. Experience suggests that the private sector is slow to start 
investing in conflict-affected environments, the exception being telecommunications. Over time, 
private investors tend to focus on those public goods which can be ‘tolled’ or receive a tariff, 
such as water and electricity. Donor financing will be required in the ‘recovery phase’ while the 
necessary conditions of stabilization and rule of law are gradually reestablished. 
40. 
Fraud and corruption are high risks in a conflict-affected context such as Somalia. 
Operations need to take measures to minimize risks, including on the supply side, such as (a) 
ensuring technical as well as financial audits; (b) publicized information for contract bids and 
project budgets; and (c) establishment of complaint links and grievance redress mechanisms. 
These have to be matched on the demand side by strengthening transparency (for example, 
public information on walls and signs), accountability (for example, score cards for social 
infrastructure and social audits) and participation (for example, establishment of user-
management committees).  
                                                 
4 See, for example, Ken Menkhaus, Aid and Institution Building in Fragile States, UNU Wider 2014/02 
11 
 
41. 
Measures to build in sustainability of small-scale investments. The European Union 
stated in 1997 that there is great need to build a sense of ownership, through beneficiary 
contribution and, in the long run, to build sustainability through good cost-recovery systems 
and/or private management of public utilities. The historic and structural lack of maintenance in 
Somali infrastructure, the tradition of non-sustainability, is behind much of the decay of facilities 
such as water supplies and tarmac roads. Users of such facilities will have to find ways for 
maintenance, based on an enhanced sense of ownership. (Midterm Review of the First 
Rehabilitation Program for Somalia, European Union, 1997). To counter the risks of 
unsustainability, measures will need to include (a) institutional arrangements, to ensure the 
continuation of O&M activities post-project, for example, linked with the local authorities; (b) 
capacity building of community/local authority capacity for such post-project support; (c) costs 
related to O&M to be included in subproject envelopes; (d) technical designs to account for the 
vernacular and availability of materials on the local market; (e) the results framework to include 
one indicator relating to O&M; and (f) the building up of lessons, such as joint work with other 
donors and the FGS on longitudinal technical and qualitative studies with specific focus on 
O&M arrangements and sustainability. 
42. 
Recovery and development interventions need to be implemented through a conflict 
lens with a high preponderance of traumatized beneficiaries, presence of militia, and the 
availability of small arms. One specific legacy important for infrastructure projects is the 
presence of landmines and unexploded ordinance. The larger Somali sub region has 
experienced over forty years of conflict that has left a legacy of landmines and unexploded 
ordinance. Some of this dates back to the Ethiopian-Somali war of the 1970s, particularly along 
the border with the Ogaden, others are more the recent use by Al Shabaab of improvised 
explosive devices. The UN Mine Action Service reports that anti-personnel landmines caused 
about 4 percent of deaths and injuries in Somalia during 2011; however, unexploded ordinance 
represented 55 percent and unknown explosive items another 32 percent.  
43. 
The SFF-LD builds on lessons learned from the implementation of the SFF-Norway 
Project. The SFF-LD will build-up the project management capacity of the Project 
Implementation Unit by bringing expertise beyond that originally funded by Norway to include 
specialists in community engagement, communications and safeguards.  These were areas not 
adequately addressed under the previous project. In addition, the SFF-LD increases capacity in 
financial management, procurement and engineering so that there will be less dependency on 
third party monitoring agents required. Finally, with a long-term vision and the Series of Projects 
approach, the Bank financing of SFF-LD will evolve over time to devolve more direct 
implementation to the regional level as conditions allow. 
IV. 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
44. 
  The SFF-LD project will be implemented on behalf of the FGS by the MoF using 
proceeds from the MPF through a Grant Agreement with the Bank. The MoF will have overall 
responsibility for project implementation, in consultation and coordination with the IRAs. A PIU 
will be established within the MoF and will report directly to the director general. The PIU, 
having overall project management responsibility, will be supported by an independent 
12 
 
Monitoring Agent (MA) that has been contracted by the Bank to provide monitoring support of 
all projects in the MPF Bank portfolio. 
45.    The MA has committed in its technical proposal to conduct supervision missions to sites by 
professional international engineers or architects that can be undertaken when the subproject 
pipeline and timelines for construction work are known. The MA will further support Bank 
supervision by gathering information from those directly involved in program implementation 
and apply a structured, risk-based approach to monitor each individual project. Additionally, 
Environmental and Safeguards (E&S), as discussed and agreed with the task team, can form a 
part of the work program. The MA will make use of Global Positioning System technology to 
document project results and findings with specific photographs. The MA will submit a monthly 
activity summary, for which reporting details will be determined with the task team and the PIU. 
Monthly reports focus on individual projects’ findings in support of program supervision. Each 
report comprises an executive summary, an overview of project activities performed, and the 
results of this work. The monthly reports can be addressed to the Bank and relevant Somali 
partners. Depending on access restrictions and travel plans, these reports can be discussed 
regularly, face-to-face with the Bank. If any physical meetings turn out to be unpractical and not 
feasible, alternatives will be sought. The MA can further deliver capacity assessments to guide a 
risk-based monitoring plan, specifically designed to support project management and 
supervision. This could include E&S safeguards issues. Fiduciary and Human Resource 
reporting, based on the MA’s support to other MPF operations will be discussed with the task 
team and reviewed regularly. The PIU will be led by a project coordinator (PC), reporting to the 
director general of the MoF. In addition, the PIU will include a deputy project coordinator (DPC) 
and also include at the central level a monitoring and evaluation officer (MEO), procurement 
officer (PO), engineer, communications officer (CO), financial officer (FO), and administrative 
officer (AO). At the decentralized level, project officers will be included in each IRA and project 
committees will be established comprising stakeholders from across civil society. Sub-projects 
will be implemented in the regions (pre-1991) with procurement and financial management (FM) 
functions centralized in the FGS MoF through the PIU. The sub-projects will be identified 
through a consultative process that is led by the regions, with the support of the PIU/MoF and the 
FGS Ministry of Interior. Selected sub-projects are approved by a Steering Committee that 
includes the IRA, FGS. A regional project’s officer will oversee the day-to-day implementation 
of sub-projects and will be supported by a Project Committee comprising regional stakeholders 
from the public, private, and civil society sectors. Once completed, sub-projects are transferred 
to the IRAs. 
 
46.   The SFF-LD project will be implemented over a period of 24 months as the first in the SoP.  
 
47.   Given that the SFF-LD is taking over the SFF-Norway, the project, and particularly the 
PIU, is in a satisfactory state of readiness for rapid project implementation. The PIU Head, 
Deputy and principal engineer are in place and two sub-projects have already been identified and 
have undergone the preparatory phase of local consultation and drawing up of an agreement 
reflecting consensus. Expressions of interest have been initiated ready to launch the contracting 
process for design engineers as soon as the project is effective. In turn, an updated draft POM 
was completed prior to negotiations and will be finalized within three months of effectiveness 
and a consultant is working with the PIU on strengthening its guidance on community 
participation and social accountability.  
13 
 
 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) 
48.     Results-based M&E will follow a methodology for measuring and monitoring results, as 
well as for review. The baseline for measuring results under the SFF-LD will be validated within 
six months of appraisal; responsibility will rest with the PIU complemented by close Bank 
support. A results framework and monitoring matrix to track inputs, outputs, and outcomes has 
been developed for the project with intermediate and key performance indicators (see Annex 1). 
Project implementation progress will be monitored continuously and outputs and outcomes will 
be reviewed during project supervision to evaluate progress using data compiled by the PIU.  
 
49.      M&E will measure individual project performance according to results framework targets 
and provide quarterly activity reports, targeting both the management of contractors as well as 
external stakeholders. A baseline survey, annual beneficiary surveys to measure who and to what 
extent people benefit from the infrastructure and services as well as how it affects their lives in 
both social and economic terms, an end-line survey, an end term review and final 
implementation completion report will be completed. In view of the SFF-LD’s nature and the 
strategic importance of scaling up its activities to other areas in Somalia, the M&E system will 
target the identification of lessons to be applied to the design of follow up projects. The Bank 
team will provide technical support to the PIU as needed to carry-out its duties and 
responsibilities toward this project.  
 
50.      Further, it is envisaged that some components of the M&E system will be participatory, 
engaging citizens and in conjunction with the focal points and community leadership in the 
regions thus contributing towards the empowerment of communities, building trust among 
implementation stakeholders and strengthening cohesion by the socialization of the results and 
achievements of the project.  
 
C. Sustainability 
51. 
The SFF-LD project has been designed for sustainability. At the project level, the design 
rests on building on the success of the original SFF-Norway to ensure rapid roll-out by working 
through an existing implementation framework, focusing on sub-projects that are simple and do 
not require heavy investment in  O&M, and which can be implemented by local private sector 
contractors. At the same time the SFF-LD has introduced a more robust M&E framework to 
assess project impacts and evaluate any changes that will be needed as implementation 
progresses. The new design also introduces a framework for evaluating the E&S impacts of sub-
projects as well as providing for assurances that sub-projects will take into account their 
downstream O&M of sub-projects after the assets are transferred to the IRAs and local 
communities. A proven methodology for engaging regional stakeholders in all phases of the 
project cycle will be strengthened with additional support for civic engagement. The SoP design 
will allow for continual assessment of project implementation and impact and for changes to be 
made with each new project in the series to ensure sustainability. 
 
14 
 
V. 
A. Overall Risk Rating and Explanation of Key Risks 
52. 
A full Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT) is outlined in Annex 5; a 
summary is presented in Table 2. 
Table 2. Summary SORT Assessment 
Risk Categories 
Rating (H, S, M, or L) 
1. Political and Governance  
High 
2. Macroeconomic  
Substantial 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies  
Substantial 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program  
Moderate 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability  
Substantial 
6. Fiduciary  
High 
7. Environment and Social  
Moderate 
8. Stakeholders  
Substantial 
9. Security 
High 
Overall  
High 
 
53. 
  The overall risk rating for the SFF-LD project is High. The government is unfamiliar 
with Bank investment operations requirements and does not have the capacity required to 
manage projects. High risks posed by the challenging operational environment, continued 
insecurity, inadequate institutional capacity, and a negative fiduciary track record have been 
systematically addressed through project preparation activities. The Bank will continue to guide 
institutional arrangements for project implementation and coordination and provide support 
through project components, supervision and oversight, and clear reporting and accountability 
mechanisms. The project emphasizes building a capable and effective platform up front with the 
PIU to deliver small-scale investments in the regions over the project duration. In turn, the POM 
includes guidance to the PIU on when to suspend activities due to insecurity and how, through 
the SC, the sequencing of activities can be revised to mitigate project risks. 
54. 
  Political and governance risks are High. Al Shabaab still retains control of territory, 
particularly in rural areas, and occasionally launches attacks on key urban areas. In turn, the 
political process, including the relationship between the emerging IRAs and the central FGS, 
remains fragile. This tension may be exacerbated by the anticipated elections in 2016. This risk 
can enter the project level with political competition over scarce financial resources. In turn, 
there is very low accountability, transparency, and general FM capacity. Mitigating measures 
will include regular and systematic efforts to encourage collective project action at the technical 
levels in the FGS and IRAs to sustain activity beyond any political turbulence. This will include 
regular communication on project activities, allocations, and processes. With regard to fiduciary 
risks, the Bank has generic support on the PFM for the FGS, undertook an extensive review of 
the SFF-Norway, and has put in place the necessary measures, including the use of an 
independent MA.   
15 
 
55. 
  The macroeconomic risk is Substantial.  Somalia is one of the poorest countries, with 
a gross national income of US$284. Some 80 percent of its exports are from one product—
livestock—leaving it exceptionally prone to external economic shocks. The substantial 
dependency of the FGS upon donor funding underlines the fiscal fragility and weak revenue 
base. The Bank, working with others such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), is engaged 
in strengthening the overall macroeconomic and fiscal framework. This includes potential next 
steps toward debt relief. As a SoP, project objectives and activities can be adjusted accordingly, 
contingent on the overall environment.  
56. 
  Sector strategies and policies risks are Substantial. There are weak national 
institutional structures accompanied by a fragmented stabilization process with many different 
actors including the African Union peacekeeping mission, the UN, and a number of donor and 
nongovernmental recovery activities. Once effective, the Bank will work with the PIU on how to 
coordinate with partners and strengthen technical approaches to project challenges such as 
safeguards and M&E.   
57. 
  Technical design risk is Moderate. Project activities are moderately complex in a 
highly complex environment that comprises many political security and governance challenges. 
The design of the project is relatively simple, with an incremental SoP approach to allow for 
adjustments and a relatively substantive up-front investment in program management capacity to 
create an effective project platform that could absorb additional funding when available.  
58. 
  The institutional capacity risk is Substantial. Capacity and authority in Somalia is 
relatively weak given the history of conflict and mistrust with public institutions. Conforming to 
the new draft guidelines of the Civil Service Commission, the project will ensure the recruitment 
of the best consultants to act as FGS advisors in the project (including the head and deputy head) 
and create a sufficiently attractive technical environment in which the best available staff can be 
identified and retained.  
59. 
  Fiduciary risks are High. The FM and procurement environment in Somalia remains 
inadequate. Levels of mismanagement, fraud, lack of transparency, and corruption exist, and 
although anticorruption and public sector regulations are in place, problems persist, contributing 
to low levels of trust in government institutions. Mitigation measures for governance issues have 
been built in the project design in the form of strict fiduciary control mechanisms and application 
of Bank fiduciary rules, as well as through targeted participatory and consultative mechanisms 
for project activities and a focus on social accountability. The project will (a) ensure that a 
dedicated procurement specialist with experience in Bank policies and the ability to provide 
capacity building is embedded within the PIU; (b) include in the POM a well-described 
procurement process; and (c) include oversight as part of the MA’s role. Further details on these 
risks are outlined in the Financial Management section of Annex 3.  
60. 
 Environmental and Social Safeguard risk is Moderate. Given the relative simplicity 
and small scale of the proposed activities the E&S risks are Moderate. Mitigating measures 
include the rollout of the E&S Action Plan as well as further training and technical assistance to 
PIU staff.  
16 
 
61.       Stakeholders’ risk is Substantial. Opposition from some stakeholders (civil society, 
private sector organizations, other donors, and other members of the general public), in light of 
the sectarian nature of the conflict and violence, can have a negative impact on the achievement 
of the PDO. The project objectives are however clear and through a targeted communications 
strategy, it is hoped that they should generally be well understood by an array of stakeholders. 
 
62.      Security situation risk is High. Much of Somalia remains in conflict which affects 
access to locations and insecurity for staff, both national and international. Mitigation measures 
will include standard operating procedures for Bank staff combined with further training on risk 
analysis and monitoring for the PIU.  
 
VI. 
A. Economic and Financial Analysis 
63.   
No precise estimate of the economic rate of return has yet been undertaken and a usual 
economic and financial analysis for this program will be difficult given the paucity of economic 
data, the ongoing conflict in Somalia, and the uncertainty in determining costs and benefits. 
However, the implementation of the program can lead to a number of benefits to the population 
through the increased legitimacy and functionality of the state. This can be done in a number of 
ways: (a) the establishment of public infrastructure as an important building-block towards 
effective administration generating public support and the restoration of public confidence in 
state structures; (b) allowing the state to be seen to provide basic services to populations outside 
Mogadishu as security is progressively expanded; (c) the integration of FM and procurement 
systems between the federal and emerging state structures enabling a technical engagement 
horizontally between the IRAs and vertically between the states and the FGS; and (d) the 
strengthening of various local investment programs focusing on stabilization with the emerging 
state institutions concerned with development programming.   
 
64.   
The public good nature of the investments to be financed by the Project, with a particular 
focus on using government systems in stabilization activities in Somalia, justifies Bank 
financing.  In addition, the Bank has extensive experience working in conflict environments in 
similar projects where the Bank can bring significant value in helping to build state legitimacy 
through small-scale infrastructure and utilizing participatory approaches. 
 
B. Technical 
65. 
  The risk assessment in relation to the technical aspects of the project is rated as 
Moderate. The TIU is in the process of executing works under the SFF-Norway in the Benadir, 
Hiraan, and Galgaduud regions. The SFF-LD project preparation team met in Somalia with the 
PIU officers involved with the implementation of the ongoing SFF-Norway to discuss the 
implementation arrangements, procurement procedures, design modalities, contractors’ 
availability and quality of work, construction supervision, labor-intensive construction 
methodologies, and the choice of investments in infrastructure and services in relation to the 
ability of the local population to operate and maintain the infrastructure.   
17 
 
66. 
  The SFF-LD project preparation team’s assessment of the capacity of the PIU is 
sufficiently high enough to undertake and implement the proposed SFF-LD and scale-up over the 
coming years, as envisaged with the Series of Projects. There may be the need to recruit an 
additional one or two engineering staff once the SFF-LD finances additional rounds. Additional 
procurement staff might also be required; this is being taken up under the procurement section.   
C. Financial Management 
67.    The FM risk is assessed as High. This is confirmed in the UN-Bank JNA and the PFM 
Needs Assessment which recognized that systems managing public resources are very weak. 
Further, there is a rudimentary, unregulated banking sector with a high potential for money-
laundering and vulnerability to financial crime. In addition, there is the potential of restricted 
movement, high insecurity and volatility due to the active Al Shabaab insurgency. The Bank 
therefore will work closely with the FGS to support and strengthen the use of country systems 
without creating parallel arrangements and in line with the provisions of the ‘Somalia New Deal 
Compact’. The FM arrangements will be continuously monitored through frequent FM 
supervision and independent monitoring, and will be updated to reflect the emerging 
developments in the FM systems. A detailed description of the project FM system and flow of 
funds is provided in Annex 3.  
 
D. Procurement 
68. 
  The FGS does not have the institutional capacity or a legislative framework to handle 
robust public procurement. To strengthen the government procurement system, a Public 
Procurement and Concessions Bill, one of five PFM bills, was prepared and tabled before the 
parliament. At entity level, multilateral development agencies do not have any designated 
procurement cadre. The institutional and managerial capacity remains very weak and poorly 
staffed. The designated officers at the MoF, like all the other ministries and local governments 
(regional administrations), do not have the desired skills and experience to handle public 
procurement. 
69. 
  Procurement for the proposed project will be carried out in accordance with the latest 
revision of the Bank’s ‘Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services 
under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits & Grants by World Bank Borrowers’ dated January 2011 
(revised July 2014); and ‘Guidelines: Selection and Employment of Consultants under IBRD 
Loans and IDA Credits & Grants by World Bank Borrowers’ dated January 2011 (revised July 
2014), that facilitate dealing with the emergency and fragile situations in Bank-financed projects 
and Recipient-executed Trust Funds. ‘Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and 
Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants, (the Anti-
Corruption Guidelines)’ dated October 15, 2006 and revised in January 2011 and the provisions 
stipulated in the Legal Agreement will be applied. Somalia being a fragile and conflict-affected 
situations (FCS) country, procurement under the projects will be processed under special 
procurement arrangements referred to in paragraph 20 of OP 11.00. 
70.    Project procurement implementation arrangements and risk identification. The TIU 
will be transformed into a PIU. Procurement under the project will be carried out by a PIU to be 
established under the MoF, which will greatly benefit the PIU because it will draw on the 
18 
 
support from the Directorate of Procurement to compliment the role of the Procurement Officer 
(PO) designated to the PIU. Due to the apparent capacity limitations, the diverse locations of 
project sites, and the tight timelines for the implementation of the grant, a qualified and 
experienced PO, conversant with project procurement and IDA procurement guidelines, will be 
recruited competitively to strengthen the PIU. The PO will also be supported by the technical 
assistance procurement specialist supporting other Bank projects and the procurement team 
deployed under the Directorate of Procurement in the MoF. Detailed procurement arrangements 
are in Annex 3. 
 
E. Social (including Safeguards) 
71. 
  Somalia has been beset by armed conflict for over two decades. This has had an 
enormous social impact upon the population. Society is fragmented along many social lines, real 
and imagined, and in the absence of trusted public institutions, communities rely far more upon 
informal networks and traditional structures such as clan elders. Various research suggests that 
the best examples of cross-clan collective action has been established in the urban space 
particularly at the municipal level where pragmatic search for solutions has overruled primordial 
fears and mistrust.  
72. 
  However, given such social fragmentation, there remain many challenges around active 
participation, recognition, and redress for many marginalized groups starting with women but 
also including youth and certain minority sub-clans. These groups are often discriminated 
against, stigmatized, and excluded from decision making. Externally financed projects have not 
had a great track record in establishing systems and procedures to ensure inclusion of such 
groups as well as strengthened accountability of decision making. Topics such as gender, 
community participation, and social accountability will be examined by the Bank team and PIU 
once the project is effective.  
73. 
The overall social impacts of the project are expected to be largely positive. The repair of 
communities’ core infrastructure and assets will benefit a wide range of stakeholders, such as the 
users of roads, markets, and public buildings. An intensive consultative process with community-
based stakeholders, to identify and decide on the subprojects to be financed for a specific 
community, is expected to strengthen cohesion and cooperation among the community members, 
create a stronger sense of shared ownership, and ensure joint responsibility for the repair and 
maintenance of assets. Finally, the implementation of FGS-funded projects through federal and 
local agencies will increase citizen-government trust and perceptions of FGS’ reach, 
competence, and accountability.  
74. 
All financed activities will take place on publicly-owned land, which will be free of 
private use and encroachments. Most activities will be implemented on existing footprints of 
infrastructure and buildings. There will be no acquisition of privately-owned land, or land used 
by private parties for their individual livelihoods. The project will be implemented in urban 
locations, and so there is a chance of physical cultural resources being encountered. Thus the 
planned safeguards instruments, Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), will 
contain provisions for chance finds, in case artefacts or other physical cultural resources are 
discovered during civil works execution. Overall the project will mostly finance urban 
infrastructure that was built during the past few decades and as such will not constitute cultural 
19 
 
heritage. None of the project-affected stakeholders can be considered indigenous peoples in the 
terms of the policy. 
75. 
None of the social safeguards policies (OP 4.10, OP 4.11, OP 4.12) are triggered by the 
Project. 
F. Environment (including Safeguards) 
76. 
The specific project locations of future activities are currently unknown but will broadly 
be located in urban surroundings, often close to the centers of urban agglomerations, usually in 
the provincial capitals. The baseline conditions are expected to be characterized by an urban 
environment, which has for considerable time been altered and impacted by human presence and 
activity. The current environmental baselines, especially relating to environmental services, 
waste management, pollution control, topsoil and vegetation management, drainage, erosion and 
sedimentation, biodiversity, and human health and safety (including workplace and traffic safety) 
are expected to be very low. 
77. 
Currently no national regulations, standards, or guidelines for E&S assessment and 
management instruments exist in Somalia; thus, the project will need to rely on Bank policies 
and standards, as well as international good practices for E&S assessment and management on 
an operational level.  
78. 
Capacity for safeguards management is very low; capacity building will be built into the 
project implementation period, in the form of a series of workshops in four or five urban centers 
in Somalia. In addition, to avoid overly complex safeguards requirements, the positive list of 
eligible project activities has been kept as simple and narrow as possible, with clearly defined 
E&S issues that can be addressed with standard safeguards instruments (for example, checklist 
type, preconfigured ESMP templates that only need to be completed with simple information). 
Capacity building will then focus on basic principles and practical guidance regarding E&S 
management and good housekeeping. Also, due to the lack of counterpart capacity, E&S 
screening, the assignment and preparation of E&S instruments, and their implementation during 
works execution will be part of the design/supervision engineers’ terms of reference (ToR).  
79. 
Due to (a) the lack of client capacity and (b) the need for urgent assistance, the Project 
has been prepared under paragraph 12 of OP 10.00 for ‘projects in situations of urgent need for 
assistance or capacity constraints’. The preparation of safeguards instruments has been deferred 
to the implementation period; in lieu an Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP) has been 
developed during the project preparation period (see Annex 7). Once the project becomes 
effective, the Bank will assist the Borrower to prepare the appropriate E&S instruments. For 
most subprojects, the expected impacts are minor and the safeguards requirements modest, given 
that most structures and installations will have existed before and the project will only finance 
their repair, reconstruction, or reinstatement. The expected typologies (for example, 
repair/reconstruction of buildings, roads, and municipal infrastructure) mostly require simple, 
checklist-type ESMPs that will become part of the works contracts, set the E&S standards and 
compliance mechanisms, and serve as a contractual basis for supervision and enforcement of 
good E&S practice during the works. 
20 
 
80. 
Given the expected minor E&S impacts, the project triggers OP 4.01 (environmental and 
social assessment) and has been classified as safeguards category B (limited impacts). 
G. Other Safeguards Policies Triggered 
81. 
No safeguards policies other than those described have been triggered. No E&S issues 
other than the ones described are expected to be encountered. 
H. World Bank Grievance Redress 
82. 
Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a Bank-
supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms 
or the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are 
promptly reviewed to address project-related concerns. Project-affected communities and 
individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent Inspection Panel which 
determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of the Bank’s noncompliance with 
its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been 
brought directly to the Bank's attention, and Bank management has been given an opportunity to 
respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s corporate GRS, visit 
http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s 
Inspection Panel, visit www.inspectionpanel.org. 
21 
 
Country: Somalia 
Project Name: Special Financing Facility for Local Development Project (P156257) 
 
Project Development Objectives 
PDO Statement 
To support the construction and reconstruction of infrastructure and the development of public service delivery capacity in targeted areas of Somalia and support 
the Federal Government and Regional Administrations capacity to respond to an eligible crisis or emergency. 
These results are at 
Project Level 
Project Development Objective Indicators 
 
 
Cumulative Target Values 
Indicator Name 
Baseline 
2016 
2017 
End Target 
Direct project 
beneficiaries 
(Number) - (Core) 
0.00 
250000.00 
1000000.00 
1000000.00 
Female 
beneficiaries 
(Percentage - 
Sub-Type: 
Supplemental) - 
(Core) 
0.00 
51.00 
51.00 
51.00 
Financed sub-
projects that are 
functioning/ 
delivering 
services to 
0.00 
2.00 
3.00 
3.00 
22 
 
communities three 
months after 
completion (#) 
(Number) 
Perceptions of 
Regional 
Administrations 
or federal 
government 
performance on 
sub-project 
activity (%) 
(Percentage) 
0.00 
0.00 
60.00 
60.00 
Sub-projects for 
which 
community/ or 
local authority 
engagement in 
post-project 
sustainability and/ 
or O&M plan is 
established (#) 
(Number) 
0.00 
2.00 
5.00 
5.00 
Beneficiaries 
under the 
activated crisis 
response 
component (#) 
(Number) 
0.00 
 
 
 
Intermediate Results Indicators 
 
 
Cumulative Target Values 
Indicator Name 
Baseline 
2016 
2017 
End Target 
Local Project 
Oversight 
Committees 
0.00 
2.00 
5.00 
5.00 
23 
 
established (#) 
(Number) 
Grievances 
registered related 
to project are 
addressed (%) 
(Percentage) 
0.00 
100.00 
100.00 
100.00 
Interim Regional 
Administrations 
accompanying 
project design and 
implementation 
(consultation, 
identification, 
procurement and 
implementation 
processes) (#) 
(Number) 
0.00 
2.00 
5.00 
5.00 
Roads 
rehabilitated, 
Non-rural 
(Kilometers) - 
(Core) 
0.00 
14.00 
14.00 
30 
Sub-projects 
completed as 
planned and 
within budget (#) 
(Number) 
0.00 
2.00 
5.00 
5.00 
Government 
officials 
participating in 
capacity building 
measures under 
the project (#) 
(Number) 
0.00 
20 
40 
100 
Work days 
created for short 
0.00 
50 
100 
150 
24 
 
term employment 
in the sub-projects 
(of which female) 
(#) 
(Number) 
Specific POM for 
the contingency 
component 
(Component 3) 
has been adopted 
(Yes/No) 
N 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Description 
Project Development Objective Indicators 
Indicator Name 
Description (indicator definition etc.) 
Frequency 
Data Source / Methodology 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Direct project beneficiaries 
Direct beneficiaries are people or groups who 
directly derive benefits from an intervention 
(i.e., children who benefit from an 
immunization program; families                          
that have a new piped water connection). 
Please note that this indicator requires                
supplemental information. Supplemental 
Value: Female beneficiaries (percentage)           
. Based on the assessment and definition of 
direct project beneficiaries, specify                     
what proportion of the direct project 
beneficiaries are female. This indicator               
is calculated as a percentage. 
Bi-annual 
Sub-Project Progress Reports 
PIU (MEO) 
Female beneficiaries 
Based on the assessment and definition of 
direct project beneficiaries, specify what 
percentage of the beneficiaries are female. 
Once per sub-
project 
Progress Report 
PIU 
Financed sub-projects that are Measures share of sub-projects effectively 
Bi-annually 
Sub-project Progress Reports 
PIU (MEO) 
25 
 
functioning/ delivering 
services to communities three 
months after completion (#) 
delivering services in the respective project 
location. Sub-projects under Component 3 are 
not considered to calculate this indicator. The 
limited project duration only allows to assess 
project progress three month after completion. 
Perceptions of Regional 
Administrations or federal 
government performance on 
sub-project activity (%) 
The survey will also capture detailed 
dimensions like: - beneficiary satisfaction with 
sub-project activity - beneficiary satisfaction 
with IRA performance, intentions - beneficiary 
satisfaction with planning/ consultation 
process Etc. 
Once per 
completed 
sub-project 
Perception Surveys 
PIU (MEO) 
Sub-projects for which 
community/ or local authority 
engagement in post-project 
sustainability and/ or O&M 
plan is established (#) 
Measures the existence of specific 
arrangements created under the project to 
ensure ownership by project beneficiaries. 
Along the practice under the SFF-Norway 
project, the signing of the “Sustainability 
Agreement”, as specified in the POM, will 
serve as the measure for this indicator. 
bi-annual 
Sub-project progress reports 
PIU (MEO) 
Beneficiaries under the 
activated crisis response 
component (#) 
Only used if and when Component 3 is 
triggered. Targets to be determined when and 
if Component 3 is triggered. 
ad hoc 
Sub-project progress reports 
PIU 
Intermediate Results Indicators 
Indicator Name 
Description (indicator definition etc.) 
Frequency 
Data Source / Methodology 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Local Project Oversight 
Committees established (#) 
For each sub-project an oversight committee 
will be established. 
with every 
sub-project 
Quarterly Reports 
PIU 
Grievances registered related 
to project are addressed (%) 
For each sub-project % 
annual 
Annual Report 
PIU 
Interim Regional 
Administrations 
accompanying project design 
and implementation  (#) 
The indicator will measure the participation of 
IRA Project Officers throughout the sub-
project design and implementation as specified 
in the POM. 
annual 
Quarterly and Annual Reports PIU 
Roads rehabilitated, Non-rural Kilometers of all non-rural roads reopened to 
motorized traffic, rehabilitated, or upgraded 
annual 
Annual Report; Sub-project 
progress reports 
PIU 
26 
 
under the project.  Non-rural roads are roads 
functionally classified                                          
in various countries as Trunk or Primary, 
Secondary or Link roads, or sometime                
s Tertiary roads. Typically, non-rural roads 
connect urban centers/towns/settlements             
of more than 5,000 inhabitants to each other or 
to higher classes of road,                                     
market towns and urban centers.  Urban roads 
are included in non-rural roads. 
Sub-projects completed as 
planned and within budget (#) 
Once the exact sub-projects have been 
identified, specific reference will be made in 
the ISR to report project outcomes. 
annual 
Annual Report; Sub-project 
progress reports 
PIU 
Government officials 
participating in capacity 
building measures under the 
project (#) 
Officials from all levels of government are 
eligible for capacity building mechanisms 
under the project as agreed. 
annual 
Annual Report; Sub-project 
progress reports 
PIU 
Work days created for short 
term employment in the sub-
projects (of which female) (#) 
Once the exact sub-projects have been 
identified, specific targets will be made 
explicit. 
annual 
Annual Report; Sub-project 
progress reports 
PIU 
Work days created for short 
term employment in the sub-
projects for women (%) 
Based on sub-project implementation records. annual 
Annual Report; Sub-project 
progress reports 
PIU 
Specific POM for the 
contingency component 
(Component 3) has been 
adopted 
No contingency manuals exist as yet for the 
FGS.  
ad hoc 
Annual Report; Sub-project 
progress reports 
PIU 
27 
 
 
SOMALIA: Special Financing Facility for Local Development Project (P156257) 
 
A. Project Description 
 
1.      The SFF-LD builds on the successful SFF-Norway project. It is designed to support a 
simple process for the planning, financing, implementation and oversight of small-scale public 
works in support of the FGS’s state and peace building objectives. Evidence suggests that the 
efficient and fair provision of goods and services plays a key role in building public confidence 
in a government during its initial phase of establishment and consolidation. To that end, the 
objective of the SFF-LD is to support the construction and reconstruction of infrastructure and 
the development of public service delivery capacity in targeted areas of Somalia and support the 
Federal Government and Interim Regional Administrations capacity to respond to an eligible 
emergency. 
 
2. 
The project is conceived as a SoP. While drawing extensively from the experience of the 
SFF-Norway, the first project of the series to be funded by the MPF is envisaged as a pilot. As 
experience is consolidated during the implementation of the pilot, lessons will be internalized 
and, conditions permitting, the SoP approach will allow for the scaling up of the pilot phase to 
additional regions and potentially allow for incremental implementation changes in subsequent 
phases as conditions warrant and allow (for example, the potential to move from centralized 
implementation to a decentralized block-grant system in line with the establishment of the new 
IRAs, or Federal Member States, once the constitution has been finalized).  
3. 
While the SoP is anticipated to have a notional overall financing envelope of US$25 
million from the MPF and will be implemented over a period of five to seven years, this first 
pilot phase will comprise total MPF funding of US$6 million, in two separate grants of US$4 
million and US$2 million (due to MPF cash flow and timing of donor contributions), comprising 
three components, implemented over a period of two years.  
B. Project Components 
 
4.     Three components are proposed: 
 
Component 1 Small-scale Infrastructure (US$3.90 million) 
5. 
This component will finance small-scale local development activities in 13 of the pre-
1991 administrative regions of Somalia (out of a total of 18). The grant amounts to each region 
will continue the previous approach of distribution, adopted by the SFF-Norway, following an 
‘equal shares’ basis of US$700,000–750,000 per region. The grants will cover design and 
supervision costs and the costs of implementation of the works or activities. Following a process 
of consultation with the regions, project’s will be identified and agreed and will be based on a 
positive list of potential subprojects. 
 
28 
 
Component 2: Program Operations and Capacity Building (US$2.10 million)  
6. 
This component will finance costs associated with overall project implementation and 
additional capacity-building activities that will support the strengthening of the PIU (proposed 
new name of the TIU) and the emerging IRAs. It will have two subcomponents:   
(a) PIU Operating Costs (US$1.34 million). This subcomponent will cover the costs of 
PIU staff for a period of 2 years and costs of day-to-day operations, including the 
salaries and allowance costs of the PIU members, consultancies required for technical 
assistance, project officers at the subnational level, and associated costs with the 
running of the PIU including, among others, office running costs, program-related 
travel expenses, related meetings costs, and project assessment and monitoring costs. 
An annual work plan will be agreed between the PIU and the Bank to establish the 
parameters of the costs and activities to be financed under this subcomponent. 
(b) Capacity Building (US$0.76 million). Technical assistance and capacity building will 
include workshops, training, advisory services and learning-by-doing and will focus 
on practical aspects of capital investment project management. Targeted audiences 
will be FGS ministries as well as IRAs. Areas of capacity building will include M&E, 
procurement, communications and community outreach, and E&S safeguards. 
Capacity building will be provided at both central and decentralized levels. It will 
include a combination of just-in-time support in addition to structured workshops built 
around the project components and requirements for effective implementation.   
Component 3: Contingency Emergency Response (US$0) 
7.     This component will allow for project funds to be used to address emergency works or 
activities resulting from potential external shocks, such as natural disasters. Somalia is routinely 
impacted by drought, flooding, and other shocks. If such conditions rise to a critical level (as 
determined by the FGS) during the implementation of the project, funds can potentially be 
allocated for emergency works or activities in response. Subprojects or activities supported under 
this component will be approved by the SC. This component will be similar to contingent 
components routinely included in IDA-funded projects. 
 
C. Geographic Coverage 
8. 
The SFF-LD will cover 13 regions of Somalia (out of a total of 18), using the boundaries 
of the administrative regions as they existed before 1991. The project will be rolled out to 
regions using a phased approach which was first established under the original SFF-Norway 
arrangements. Under the SFF-Norway, subprojects were carried out in the Benadir, Hiraan, and 
Galgaduud regions. Under the pilot phase of the SFF-LD, it is anticipated that subprojects will be 
rolled out in the first instance to Benadir, Bay, Middle Shabelle, and Middle Juba regions and 
subsequently to the Lower Shebelle, Nugal, and Bakool regions, with future tranches of the SoP 
rolling out to Mudug, Gedo, and Bari regions, before returning to regions covered in earlier 
phases. The timing and roll out will be flexible to respond to security and political conditions in 
Somalia. 
29 
 
 
Table 2.1. Original Plan for Phasing of SFF-LD Projects by Region (showing the continuation from the first 
allocations per region under SFF-Norway) 
 
Regions Covered under 
SFF-Norway 
 
 
Proposed First Set of 
Regions under SFF-LD 
Pilot Phase 
 
Proposed Second Set of Regions 
under SFF-LD Pilot Phase 
 
Proposed for Subsequent 
Funding Round 
Region 
Budget in 
US$ 
Region 
Budget in 
US$ 
Region 
Budget in 
US$ 
Region 
Budget in 
US$ 
Benadir 
700,000 
Bay 
700,000 
Lower Shebelle 
700,000 
Mudug 
700,000 
Hiraan 
750,000 
Middle 
Shabelle 
700,000 
Nugal 
700,000 
Gedo 
700,000 
Galgaduud 
750,000 
Lower Jubba 
700,000 
Bakool 
700,000 
Bari 
700,000 
– 
– 
Benadir 
300,000 
– 
– 
Middle Jubba 
700,000 
TOTAL 
2,200,000 
 
2,400,000 
 
2,100,000 
 
2,800,000 
 
D. Eligible Subprojects 
9. 
A positive list of eligible subprojects and activities to be financed under Component 1 
have been agreed, based on projects that were financed under the SFF-Norway, the demand 
demonstrated from the regions, and similar projects financed in conflict and fragile state 
environments. The positive list includes the following public works projects: 
(a) Buildings: Construction or repair of administrative and community buildings 
(b) Sanitation:  Provision or repair of public sanitation facilities in primary health care or 
education facilities where water supply is already available 
(c) Roads:  Rehabilitation of local roads (using labor-intensive methods only), 
construction or rehabilitation of foot paths, culverts and bridges, including street 
lights 
(d) Health:  Construction, repair, or extension of primary health care centers only in cases 
where a health care worker is already present 
(e) Education:  Construction, repair, or extension of existing primary schools where a 
teacher is already present and purchase of furniture or equipment for existing primary 
schools 
(f) Markets:  Construction or repair of public markets 
(g) Livestock:  Construction or rehabilitation of livestock dips 
(h) Energy:  Small-scale, off-grid renewable energy projects (for example, street lights, 
energy for public buildings, and markets) 
 
10. 
SFF-LD subprojects will not include buildings related to security functions of the states 
(for example, prisons, courts, and police stations). The positive list of subprojects will be 
reviewed on a regular basis (every six months) with the possibility of revision based on 
expressed demand from regions and any changes will be agreed and endorsed by the SC. 
Subprojects will be expected to generate short-term employment and to that end will favor labor-
intensive approaches to construction. O&M plans are expected to be developed for all 
subprojects and agreed by the regions as part of the handover of the assets. 
30 
 
11. 
The list of eligible activities and public works projects will be reviewed by the Bank and 
the PIU and agreed upon on an annual basis. In no case, however, would works or activities be 
considered that will trigger significant negative environmental or social impacts.  To date the 
following SFF-Norway sub-project were completed or were on-going at the time of appraisal 
Table 2.2. SFF-Norway Subprojects 
No. 
Region 
Project Description 
Cost (US$) 
Timeline 
1 
Hiraan 
Rehabilitation of Regional 
Administration Block 
287,116 
Completed 
2 
Hiraan 
Rehabilitation of District 
Administration Blocks 
76,804 
Completed 
3 
Hiraan 
Construction of Market 
148,994 
Completed 
4 
Hiraan 
Construction of Market 
148,994 
Completed 
5 
Galgaduud 
Rehabilitation of Regional 
Administration Blocks I 
368,399 
Completed 
6 
Galgaduud 
Rehabilitation of Regional 
Administration Blocks II 
180,817 
December 2014–September 2015 
7 
Galgaduud 
Construction of Livestock 
Market 
148,817 
Completed 
8 
Benadir 
Talex Road 
154,998 
80 percent completed 
9 
Benadir 
Afarta Jardino Road 
240,541 
80 percent completed 
10 
Benadir 
Villa Somalia Road 
304,461 
80 percent completed 
Total Cost 
 
2,059,941 
 
 
12. 
Consultations have been undertaken in the regions of Bay, Middle Shabelle, and Lower 
Juba with the expectation that subprojects in those regions would have been financed by the 
original funding from Norway. However, with the decision to shift financing through the MPF 
under Bank supervision, those projects originally identified will be financed under the SFF-LD 
pilot and will constitute the first set of subprojects to be financed under the project. The 
subprojects include: 
(a) Lower Juba (Kismayo): A correctional facility, courts, and city sanitation. These were 
not approved under the SFF-Norway and cannot be financed under the SFF-LD under 
the agreed negative list. Funding could potentially come from a different source; new 
project activities will be identified accordingly. 
(b) Bay (Baidoa): The upgrading of the city’s main road (6 km) and provision of 
firefighting equipment. The road was approved and the priority will be reconfirmed 
for the SFF-LD funding. 
(c) Middle Shabelle: The rehabilitation of the Kongo Village-Jowhar Town road (5.5 km) 
and street lights for Jowhar Town. These will be reconfirmed for the SFF-LD 
funding. 
 
E. Principles of Engagement 
13. 
The design of the proposed project has been developed to take into account the 
challenging environment of the country and its rapidly changing circumstances. In so doing, 
principles of engagement, rather than a prescriptive blueprint, have been adopted. The 
preparation and implementation has also benefitted from the experience of the SFF-Norway and 
the proposed operation is a continuation of those efforts. The team has worked closely with the 
31 
 
TIU (now rebranded as the PIU) within the MoF to identify important lessons and guidance 
which will be incorporated into the project design. The principles are summarized below: 
14. 
National coverage: The intent of the project is to focus initially on identified project 
sites with the perspective to develop the instrument to be applicable throughout the territory. By 
investing in areas that have not had significant government or donor attention, the project will 
mitigate perceived biases of resource allocation and integrate peripheral areas technically and 
administratively.  
15. 
Tangential approach to development impact: The SFF-LD is an investment project of 
small-scale infrastructure to strengthen legitimacy of emerging government institutions. 
However, legitimacy can hardly be imposed from the outside. Instead, the project will focus on 
tangible outputs—administrative buildings or other local public infrastructures—to lead to the 
project outcome—legitimacy—using the SFF-LD as a methodology to link the former to the 
latter. The SFF-LD extends beyond infrastructure building; it promotes intergovernmental 
relations, use of country systems, and enhanced integration of center-periphery institutions. 
16. 
Operational flexibility: The project design will allow for rapid adaptation, because of 
(a) largely unknown local capacities and opportunities; (b) a volatile environment and significant 
regional differences; and (c) lack of data for most parts of the territory. Project implementation 
will thus be modular, iterative, and incremental, learning from successes and failures as the 
project deploys to new sites. From the onset, it is important to note that the project is risky and 
will likely require restructuring as conditions warrant 
17. 
Simple implementation process: The project design will be simple, technically and 
institutionally. The risk of failures and delays in delivery will increase with operational 
sophistication in Somalia at this point. Building on experiences gained throughout the phase of 
the SFF-Norway and other stabilization programs employing similar instruments of public 
investment can significantly inform and strengthen operations toward establishing legitimacy for 
emerging authorities. 
18. 
Do no harm: Given the contested areas the project will operate in, the project team will 
ensure that the project does not inadvertently exacerbate tensions. To this end, the project will 
engage inclusively with local power-brokers, existing institutions, including informal ones, and 
communities. It will also promote a non-threatening return of state presence and services, hence 
a focus on infrastructure investment by formal public authorities in the emerging IRAs.  
F. Project Access and Location 
19.        The SFF-LD is being implemented in a country with active armed conflict. As Map 2.1 
indicates, in the shaded and color-block areas, the African Union peacekeeping mission and FGS 
security forces and allies are increasingly in control of main urban areas and highways. 
Subprojects are being implemented in and around pre-1991 administrative regional capital towns 
that so far have been the most secure liberated areas. The SFF-LD will not be active in rural 
areas. Given the country’s volatility, this context will need to be constantly monitored and 
project adjustments made accordingly. 
 
32 
 
Map 2.1. Conflict across Somalia  
 
 
33 
 
SOMALIA: Special Financing Facility for Local Development (P156257) 
 
Project Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
1. 
 The project will be implemented on behalf of the FGS by the MoF using proceeds from 
the MPF through a Grant Agreement with the Bank. The MoF will have overall responsibility 
for project implementation, in consultation and coordination with IRAs. A PIU will be 
established within the MoF and will report directly to the Director General. The PIU, which will 
have overall project management responsibility will be supported by the independent MA which 
has been contracted by the Bank to provide monitoring support of all projects in the MPF 
portfolio. A schema for project implementation is outlined below.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
2. 
PIU. The project will be implemented by a PIU (formerly the TIU) which will be housed 
in the MoF. The PIU will be led by a PC who will report to the Director General of the MoF. In 
addition, the PIU will include a DPC and will also include an MEO, PO, engineer, CO, FO, and 
administrative officer at the centralized level. At the decentralized level projects officers will be 
included in each region. Details for each officer are given in the following paragraphs. 
3. 
Project coordinator. The PC will have overall responsibility for the management of the 
PIU and the PIU team. The PC will also be the primary interlocutor for the project with the 
Minister of Finance and the Bank. The PC will also ensure the project is implemented in 
compliance will all fiduciary and safeguards requirements, reviewing and approving all reporting 
Somalia Development and Reconstruction 
Framework  PSG4 Working Group 
Steering Committee 
(Chair - Ministry of Finance) 
PIU 
(Ministry of Finance) 
World Bank/Monitoring 
Agent 
Bidding Committee 
Tender Committee 
Service Providers 
Subproject Oversight 
Committees 
Figure 3.1. Project Implementation Schema 
34 
 
on the project within the ministry and with the Bank. The PC shall also ensure active 
engagement with other ministries and regional and administrative districts in the implementation 
of the project to ensure its smooth implementation. 
4. 
Deputy project coordinator. The DPC will have direct oversight of operations, including 
the implementation of the subprojects. In addition, the DPC shall have direct oversight of the 
regional level project officers, engineers, and the financial and administrative officers (AOs). 
The DPC will also be responsible for direct oversight of contract management and ensuring the 
effective execution of all contracts, in coordination with the engineer(s). The DPC will also be 
responsible for ensuring that proper consultative processes are undertaken at the regional level in 
the formulation of subprojects. 
5. 
Engineer. The PIU will include up to two engineers, depending on the workflow, who 
will provide technical support to the DPC and project officers. The engineer will be responsible 
for overseeing the preparation of the consultant teams preparing the subprojects, oversee 
preparation of bidding documents, and be involved in the assessment of bids and consultant 
processes for work related to subprojects. The engineer will also be responsible for assessing the 
quality and progress of subprojects and will coordinate with the MA as well as the MEO and the 
PO. 
6. 
Procurement officer. The PO will be responsible for providing proper guidance to the 
PIU on the procurement process and shall be responsible for preparing, implementing, and 
monitoring the project procurement plans. The PO will report to the PC but will maintain a 
reporting relationship to the Director of Procurement in the MoF. 
7. 
Financial Management Officer (FMO). The project will externally recruit a financial 
management specialist (FMS) to be based at the PIU. The MoF shall identify and second a 
government accountant to the PIU. The FMS will be charged with the responsibility of setting up 
the FM function at the PIU, training and building the capacity of the accountant, and 
coordinating the FM function between the PIU and the External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
(EAFS). The FMS and the accountant are expected to work in close coordination with the head 
of the PIU. 
8. 
Monitoring and Evaluation Officer. The MEO will be responsible for overall M&E of 
the project. This will include monitoring the physical and financial progress of the project. In 
addition, the MEO shall be responsible for managing the project’s overall M&E framework to 
ensure that the project is on track to meeting its development objectives, its expected outputs and 
outcomes, and the intended beneficiaries. The MEO will work in close consultation and 
coordination with the engineer, the FO, project officers, and the Bank’s independent MA. 
9. 
Communications officer (CO). The CO will be responsible for raising awareness of the 
program and the program activities. The CO will work closely with the communications team in 
the offices of the president and the prime minister to ensure that communications of the program 
are consistent with overall government communications. The CO will also oversee the 
management and production of the SFF website and other media related to the project. 
35 
 
10. 
Administrative officer. The AO will be responsible for supporting the PIU in all 
administrative tasks. This will include, among others, arranging logistics for project-related 
activities such as site visits, missions, and meetings with international partners. The AO will 
maintain project files, records, and so on and will serve as a point of contact for all 
administrative functions. 
Figure 3.2. PIU structure 
Selection of Regions 
11. 
It is the aim of the SFF-LD to finance small-scale infrastructure works in all regions, but it 
is accepted that subproject implementation in some areas of the country carry security and 
political risks that cannot be fully mitigated. The PIU will carry out structured risk assessments 
before engagement in any particular region, and the risk assessments will become part and parcel 
of the individual subproject proposals for review by the SC. The POM lays out the criteria, 
conditions, and methodology for risk assessment of regions. The risk to be evaluated include 
general security, political and governance, clan dynamics, accessibility, and the existence of 
partners such as local or non-local contracts that can undertake the subprojects. 
Subproject Cycle 
12. 
A community consultation process is undertaken in the identification of subprojects and is 
intended to strengthen FGS credibility with local and regional constituencies. This approach is 
also to promote and demonstrate the principles of transparency, participation, and community 
engagement and empowerment. Regional consultations are facilitated and managed by the PIU 
with the involvement of the MoI, together with the IRAs. 
 
Project Coordinator 
Deputy Project 
Coordinator 
Procurement 
Officer 
Engineer(s) 
Communicati
ons Officer 
M&E Officer 
Financial 
Officer 
Regional 
Project 
Officers 
Administration 
Officer  
36 
 
 The PIU consults with the MoI regarding the political and security situation of the 
region and whether there is the presence of an FGS-recognized IRA that is able to 
collaborate with the FGS on small-scale development projects. 
 The PIU communicates with the IRA through email and phone to explain the 
objectives of the project, types of eligible subprojects, and the process of selecting 
priority subprojects and the criteria for the composition of the participants for the 
consultative sessions. 
 The PIU and the IRAs work together to organize a one-day consultative workshop 
that includes, among other things, local NGOs, women’s groups, youth groups, 
business leaders, and elders. The PIU, along with representatives from the regional 
government play the role of facilitator in the consultative process to produce a list of 
needs and build consensus on how to best prioritize potential projects, based on 
available budgets. 
 Once the subprojects have been identified, the PIU, supported by the IRA 
representatives, organize a Project Oversight Committee. The Oversight Committee 
consists of representatives from the local community groups which participated in the 
original consultative process. The Oversight Committee is chaired by the local 
administration and is tasked (pro bono) with providing local oversight of the 
subprojects from the communities’ perspective. 
 Subproject detailed designs and bidding documents are prepared by consultants using 
a competitive selection process. The bidding of the works is then done through a 
competitive process that is led by the PIU but includes representation from the IRAs, 
the Local Project Officer, and the Ministry of Public Works on the bid evaluation 
committee. Works are contracted by the PIU/MoF and when completed, the assets are 
transferred to the IRAs.  
Steering Committee 
13. 
An SC will be established to approve the SFF-LD plans, review the SFF-LD performance, 
and agree on adjustments to its management and future operations based on lessons learned and 
changes that will occur to the operating environment over time. The SC will meet on a quarterly 
basis. It will approve annual work plans, procurement plans, and the SFF-LD operating budget as 
well as review SFF-LD performance reviews, quarterly financial reports, implementation 
progress reports, monitoring reports, and reports on disputes and grievances. The SC will also 
review and approve adjustments to the SFF-LD’s management and future operations based on 
lessons learned from implementation, improvements in FGS capacity, changes in the FGS fiscal 
position, and evolution of the operating environment. The SC will be chaired by the Minister of 
Finance and include lead donor representation, with other donor representatives also able to 
participate. The MA may also participate in the SC to provide technical information. The ToR 
for the SC will be included in the POM. 
 
37 
 
Financial Management, Disbursements and Procurement 
 
Detailed Financial Management and Disbursements 
Country Issues 
14. 
The 2006–2007 Joint Needs Assessment (JNA) of the PFM sector (undertaken by 
Government, UN and the World Bank) revealed that the ‘systems that manage public resources 
are weak’. The April 2013 PFM self-assessment that focused mainly on FGS PFM activities 
revealed serious capacity weaknesses similar to those identified by the JNA. However, in support 
of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness (2005), the Principles for Good International 
Engagement in Fragile States and Situations (2007), the Accra Agenda for Action (2008), and 
the Busan Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation (July 2012) there is a deliberate 
effort, as part of the New Deal ‘FOCUS’ and ‘TRUST’ principles, to use country systems. The 
underlying principle is ‘country-ownership’—anchored in the ‘strengthened PFM approach’—a 
common framework that has been widely agreed between the Bank and development partners 
and is in line with the Bank’s overall approach to strengthening its PFM work. 
Project Financial Management System 
15. 
The EAFS, a unit within the Office of the Accountant General, Federal MoF, was 
established and has been operational for the last two years. With an increase in the number of 
externally financed projects, the EAFS is being reorganized to be more effective and responsive 
to the FM needs of the projects. The EAFS is charged with the responsibility of overseeing the 
FM function for all the donor-funded projects implemented within FGS systems. In particular, 
the unit ensures the harmonization of their external assistance FM function and donor co-
ordination to reduce duplication, fragmentation, and proliferation of donor-specific FM units. 
16. 
The project will recruit a dedicated FMS to be based at the PIU. The EAFS unit will form 
part of the project’s FM team, with responsibilities for day-to-day FM of project funds. The 
project’s FM function will be carried out in line with the provisions of the EAFS Manual, project 
implementation manual, PAD, Grant Agreement, and Bank FM and Procurement Guidelines. 
The organizational structure of the EAFS takes into consideration the key areas of authority, 
responsibility, and appropriate lines of reporting. The basic functions of the EAFS will be 
planning, budgeting, and maintenance of internal control systems, as well as accounting, 
reporting, and liaising with external auditors on recipient-executed external assistance. The 
recommended organizational chart is depicted in Figure 3.3 of this Annex. The EAFS unit will 
be supported by a team of subject-matter consultants who will provide targeted technical 
assistance and on-the-job capacity-building support. The SFF-LD financial and technical 
activities will be monitored by a team of independent MAs who will review and clear interim 
payment certificates (IPCs) before release of payments.  
38 
 
Figure 3.3. FGS and FM Control Structure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Budgeting  
17. 
The FGS FY2015 annual revised supplementary budget has been prepared, endorsed by 
the councils of ministers, and approved by parliament. The project’s projected annual 
disbursements will be integrated into the FGS annual appropriated budget. The EAFS unit in 
consultation with the PIU will prepare and submit to the Bank annual work plans, budget 
estimates and detailed cash flow forecasts for necessary review and approval. The work plans, 
cash flow projections, and budget estimates will include the figures for the year delineated into 
the FGS and the participating states. The work plans and cash projections will reflect detailed 
specifications for project activities to be undertaken, schedules (including procurement plans), 
and projected expenditures under project activities. All annual work plans and cash flow 
forecasts will be sent to the task team leader at least two months before the beginning of the 
fiscal year for review and approval. The project’s estimated annual disbursements for each of the 
components will be integrated and aligned into the FGS and state budget calendars ‘on-budget’ 
and will form part of the appropriated budget by FGS and the states. Budget utilization reports 
shall be prepared from the FM systems as part of the internal governments’ periodic reports, as 
will quarterly reports submitted to the Bank.  
Accountant General 
Transactions 
approval 
Approval by Director 
General MoF 
Head of EAFS  
Transactions 
authorization 
Countersigned by the 
project coordinator 
Head of Accounting Section  
Head of Procurement Section  
Project Accountant(s) 
Procurement Specialist 
Finance Officers 
Administrative 
Assistant 
Transaction  
Processing  
Procurement Officers 
Supervisory 
controls  
Verification 
controls 
Technical Assistance 
Internal Audit  
Independent Monitoring 
Project Implementation Unit  
(FMS to provide liaison lead on the project FM activities) 
39 
 
Accounting  
18. 
The FGS has developed a Somali Financial Management Information System (SFMIS). 
The SFMIS is supported by an agreed Standard Chart of Accounts, which is comprehensively 
compliant with the IMF Government Financial Statistics and Classification of Functions of 
Government of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. The use of the 
SFMIS has been strengthened through the FY2015 Appropriation Act that requires all revenue 
and payment transactions be processed through the SFMIS and reconciled with bank accounts 
ledger balances from the Central Bank. The project’s financial transactions will be captured, 
recorded, analyzed, summarized, and reported in line with the provisions of the International 
Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) cash basis of accounting. These will be supported 
by appropriate records and documentation to track commitments and to safeguard assets. To 
facilitate preparation of the relevant reports and annual financial statements (AFSs), the project 
budgets and expenditures will be recorded, classified, and reported through the SFMIS according 
to the approved Standard Chart of Accounts. 
19. 
The project will be required to provide periodic and annual reports covering total project 
expenditures; total expenditure on each of the project’s components/activities, an analysis of that 
total expenditure into various categories of goods, works, training, consultants; and other 
procurement and disbursement categories. The specific project’s FM arrangements will further 
be spelled out in the POM. Eligibility of expenditures will be based on the actual amount 
incurred and supported by appropriate documentation. Accounting records will be maintained in 
U.S. dollars. The EAFS unit in consultation with the PIU, and in particular the FMS, will ensure 
that:  
 all important project business and financial processes are adhered to; 
 adequate internal controls and procedures are in place; 
 accounting records and requisite supporting documents are maintained.  
 unaudited interim financial reports (IFRs) are prepared and submitted to the Bank on 
a timely basis; 
 financial statements are prepared on a timely basis and in accordance with IPSAS 
cash basis; and 
 external audit is completed on time and audit findings and recommendations/issues 
raised in the management letter are resolved judiciously. 
Internal Control and Internal Auditing  
20. 
The POM will be designed and developed and periodically reviewed and updated to 
incorporate relevant emerging internal control procedures. The POM will outline key aspects of 
the project operations and technical and FM arrangements, including independent verification 
and monitoring of works. The project will institute controls and procedures to ensure works, 
goods, and services are verified and certified before release of payments. The EAFS, in 
40 
 
consultation, with the FMS will ensure that invoices and payment requests are consistent with 
signed contracts before processing and release of payments. They will also monitor and report on 
the utilization of project funds, including the fiduciary standards and the reliability of the FM 
systems. A project Fixed Assets Register will be prepared and regularly updated and physical 
verification of assets routinely carried out. The Fixed Assets Register will reflect details of 
suppliers, description and location of goods, original costs, disposal of assets, assets reference 
(identification) numbers, serial or registration numbers, dates of purchase, assets additions, 
condition of assets, and assets’ useful life and residual value. Contracts Registers will also be 
maintained with respect to all contracts with consultants, contractors, and suppliers. The EAFS in 
consultation with the FMS will prepare Contract Status Reports quarterly as part of the IFRs. 
Control procedures over fixed assets and contracts management will be the responsibility of the 
PIU.  
21. 
An internal audit function once established will be mainstreamed into project activities. 
The project will liaise with the internal audit unit to ensure that project internal audit reviews are 
included in the annual work plans. The project internal audit reports shall be prepared and shared 
with the PIU and made available to the Bank team during supervision. It is, however, important 
for the internal audi