 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD2435  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT 
ON A 
PROPOSED GRANT 
 
FROM THE SOMALIA MULTI PARTNER TRUST FUND 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$9 MILLION 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA  
 
FOR A 
 
SOMALIA URBAN RESILIENCE PROJECT 
 
JULY 31, 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social, Urban, Rural And Resilience Global Practice 
Africa Region 
 
 
 
 
   
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
     
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective June 30, 2018) 
 
Currency Unit  =   Somali Shilling 
SSH 585 = US$1 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
AFS 
Annual Financial Statements 
BRA 
Benadir Regional Administration 
DA 
Designated Account 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
ESIA 
Environment and Social Impact Assessment 
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
ESMP 
Environment and Social Management Plan 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMIS 
FMS 
GBV 
GDP 
GFDRR 
Financial Management Information System 
Federal Member States 
Gender-Based Violence 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery 
GRM 
Grievance Redress and Feedback Mechanism 
IDPs 
Internally Displaced Persons 
IFR 
Interim Unaudited Financial Report 
IPSAS 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards 
ISA 
International Standards on Auditing 
ISP 
Implementation Support Plan  
IT 
Information Technology 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MPF 
Multi-Partner Fund 
O&M 
Operations and Maintenance 
OP 
Operations Policy 
PA 
Project Account 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
PAD 
Project Appraisal Document 
PAP 
PDO 
Project Affected Persons 
Project Development Objective 
PFM 
Public Financial Management 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PIM 
Project Implementation Manual 
PP 
Procurement Plan 
PPP 
Public Private Partnership 
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development 
RAP 
Resettlement Action Plan 
RCRF  
RPF 
Recurrent Cost and Reform Project  
Resettlement Policy Framework 
SCoA 
Standard Chart of Accounts 
SFF-LD 
Special Financing for Local Development 
SoE 
Statement of Expenditures 
SoP 
SORT 
Series of Projects 
Systematic Operations Risk Rating Tool 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
SUIPP 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project  
SURP 
Somali Urban Resilience Project 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
TIS + 
UCS 
UN-JPLG 
WBG 
Transition Initiatives for Stabilization 
Use of Country Systems 
United Nations Joint Program for Local Governance 
World Bank Group 
 
Regional Vice President: Hafez Ghanem 
Country Director: Bella Bird 
Senior Global Practice Director: Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
Practice Manager: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst 
Task Team Leaders: Zishan Faiza Karim, Makiko Watanabe 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
     
 
 
  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
     
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
DATASHEET ................................................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 1 
A. Country Context................................................................................................................................ 1 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................... 2 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ............................................................................................... 5 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................... 6 
A. Project Development Objective ....................................................................................................... 6 
B. Project Components ......................................................................................................................... 7 
C. Project Beneficiaries ....................................................................................................................... 11 
D. Results Chain .................................................................................................................................. 12 
E. Project Cost and Financing .............................................................................................................. 12 
F. Series of Project Objective and Phases ........................................................................................... 13 
G. Rationale for World Bank Involvement and Role of Partners ........................................................ 14 
H. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design .................................................................... 14 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................ 16 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 16 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements......................................................................... 17 
C. Sustainability ................................................................................................................................... 17 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 18 
A. Economic Analysis .......................................................................................................................... 18 
B. Technical ......................................................................................................................................... 19 
C. Fiduciary .......................................................................................................................................... 20 
D. Safeguards ...................................................................................................................................... 21 
E. World Bank Grievance Redress Mechanisms ................................................................................. 24 
V. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 24 
A. Overall Risk Rating and Explanation of Key Risks ........................................................................... 24 
VI. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 27 
ANNEX 1: IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS AND SUPPORT PLAN ................................... 34 
ANNEX 2. DETAILED PROJECT DESCRIPTION ......................................................................... 50 
ANNEX 3. SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) .......................................... 61 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
     
i  
 
 
      
DATASHEET 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 
 BASIC INFO TABLE 
Country(ies) 
Project Name 
Somalia 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental Assessment Category 
Process 
P163857 
Investment Project 
Financing 
B-Partial Assessment 
Urgent Need or 
Capacity Constraints 
(FCC) 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component  (CERC) 
[✓] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Disbursement-linked Indicators (DLIs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict  
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
31-Jul-2018 
30-Sep-2021 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
No 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To strengthen public service delivery capacity at the sub-national level and support the reconstruction of key urban 
infrastructure in targeted areas. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
ii
 
     
 
 
Components 
 
Component Name  
Cost (US$, millions) 
 
Mogadishu Municipality  
   6.50 
 
Garowe Municipality  
   2.50 
 
Contingent Emergency Response  
   0.00 
 
 
Organizations 
 
Borrower:  
 Ministry of Finance  
Implementing Agency: 
 Benadir Regional Administration  
 Garowe Municipality  
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
Total Project Cost 
9.00 
Total Financing 
9.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
0.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILS-NewFinEnh1 
Non-World Bank Group Financing 
     Trust Funds 
9.00 
          Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
9.00 
 
  
Expected Disbursements (in US$, Millions) 
 
WB Fiscal Year   
 
 
 
 
 
 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3.00 
   4.00 
   1.50 
   0.50 
Cumulative 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   3.00 
   7.00 
   8.50 
   9.00 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
iii
 
     
 
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global 
Practice 
Fragile, Conflict & Violence 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
Gender Tag 
Does the project plan to undertake any of the following? 
a. Analysis to identify Project-relevant gaps between males and females, especially in light of 
country gaps identified through SCD and CPF 
No 
b. Specific action(s) to address the gender gaps identified in (a) and/or to improve women or 
men's empowerment 
No 
c. Include Indicators in results framework to monitor outcomes from actions identified in (b) 
Yes 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
 High 
2. Macroeconomic 
 Moderate 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
 Moderate 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
 Substantial 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
 High 
6. Fiduciary 
 Substantial 
7. Environment and Social 
 Substantial 
8. Stakeholders 
 High 
9. Other 
 High 
10. Overall 
 High 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
iv
 
     
 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?  
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
  
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project 
Yes 
No 
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 
✔ 
   
Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities OP/BP 4.03 
  
✔  
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 
✔ 
   
Forests OP/BP 4.36 
  
✔  
Pest Management OP 4.09 
  
✔  
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 
✔ 
   
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 
  
✔  
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 
✔ 
   
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 
  
✔  
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 
  
✔  
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 
  
✔  
 
Legal Covenants 
  
 Sections and Description 
As per the Grant Agreement Schedule 2, Section I.A (i), the Recipient shall maintain, throughout the Project 
implementation period Mogadishu-PIU, with institutional framework, resources, terms of reference and staffing 
satisfactory to the World Bank, including a project coordinator, a financial management specialist and a 
procurement specialist, all with qualifications, experience, and terms of reference, satisfactory to the World Bank. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
As per the Grant Agreement Schedule 2, Section I. C.1, the Recipient shall: (a) not later than forty-five (45) days 
after the Effective Date, update the Project Implementation Manuals, in form and substance satisfactory to the 
World Bank, and thereafter: (b) carry out the Project in accordance with said  Project implementation manuals. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
v
 
     
 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
As per the Grant Agreement Schedule 2, Section I. G.1, the Recipient shall prepare, the respective site-specific: (i) 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) in accordance with the provisions of the pertinent ESMF; (ii) 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) in accordance with the provisions of the RPF; and (iii) ensure adequate 
consultation on such ESMPs and RAPs, all in form and substance satisfactory to the World Bank; (b) adopt such 
ESMPs and RAPs as shall have been approved by the World Bank and publish said ESMPs and RAPs, in a manner 
acceptable to the World Bank; (c) thereafter, take such measures as shall be necessary or appropriate to ensure 
compliance with the requirements of such ESMPs and RAPs.  
 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
As per the Grant Agreement Schedule 2, Section I.B (i), the Recipient shall maintain, throughout the Project 
implementation period Garowe-PIU within Garowe Municipality, with institutional framework, resources, terms of 
reference and staffing satisfactory to the World Bank, including a project coordinator, a financial management 
specialist and a procurement specialist, all with qualifications, experience, and terms of reference, satisfactory to 
the World Bank. 
 
 
 
 
Conditions 
  
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
As per the Grant Agreement, Article IV, clause 4.01 1, this Agreement shall not become 
effective until evidence satisfactory to the World Bank has been furnished to the World Bank 
that the following condition has been fulfilled, namely that the Subsidiary Agreements have 
been executed and delivered, respectively, on behalf of the Recipient and BRA, and on behalf 
of the Recipient and the Puntland State of Somalia, and the pertinent Subsidiary Agreement 
is legally binding upon the Recipient and BRA, or upon the Recipient and the Puntland State 
of Somalia, in accordance with the terms of such Subsidiary Agreement. 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
1
 
     
 
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
 
A. Country Context 
 
1. 
Somalia is emerging from a legacy of two and half decades of cycles of violent conflict and 
fragility. Since 1991, the country has been fragmented by armed conflict, ad hoc regime change and 
state capture. The August 2012 peaceful transfer of power from a transitional to a full federal government 
in Mogadishu and the peaceful handover of power in 2017 to President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed 
Farmaajo generated domestic political momentum and triggered international recognition and support 
for the new federal government. Over the last four years, Somalia has taken encouraging steps towards a 
political settlement and the rehabilitation of government institutions. The creation of four new member 
states – Jubbaland, South-West, Galmudug and Hirshabelle – and the ouster of Al Shabab from its major 
tax bases in Mogadishu and Kismayo form the basis for a devolved/federal political settlement. While Al 
Shabab retains control and continues to destabilize parts of southern Somalia, it no longer administers 
nor controls major urban areas.  
 
2. 
However, decades of conflict compounded by recurring natural disasters have displaced a 
significant part of the society and damaged much of the country’s infrastructure, resulting in high rates 
of poverty and food insecurity. Of the 12.3 million Somali population,1 2.4 million are likely to live on the 
margins of food insecurity.2 It is estimated that some 1.1 million Somalis currently reside in neighboring 
countries as refugees, and another 1.1 million are internally displaced, many of whom live in urban areas.3 
Poverty is estimated at approximately 49 percent at the national level while overall urban poverty rate 
stands at 45 percent with the poverty rate in Mogadishu higher than the national average at 57 percent. 
Poverty is heavily concentrated in settlements of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), estimated at 70 
percent.4 The poor are also likely to experience non-monetary poverty with even more limited access to 
basic services such as education, health, water and sanitation than the overall population.5  
 
3. 
Somalia’s economy has proven remarkably resilient, but resources for infrastructure and service 
delivery are limited and poverty remains high. Despite the perpetual civil conflict, the economy has 
grown at a moderate pace. Sectors such as telecommunications, money transfer businesses, livestock 
exports, and localized electricity services drive the growth. The Government has shown remarkable 
improvement in domestic revenue collection, achieving 103.2 percent of the 2017 budget target. 
Domestic revenue grew by 26.5 percent, from US$112.7 million in 2016 to US$142.6 million in 2017 driven 
by trade taxes. The Government, however, still relies heavily on external assistance which almost doubled 
to US$103.6 million in 2017 from US$55.3 million in 2016. Total revenue in 2018 is estimated at US$274.6 
million with domestic revenue accounting for 57 percent. Yet, the current revenue levels, at about t3 
percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), are inadequate for the Government to deliver meaningful 
services to citizens. Public expenditures have expanded significantly driven by year-on-year increases in 
                                            
1 UNFPA (2014) http://somalia.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/Population-Estimation-Survey-of-Somalia-PESS-2013-
2014.pdf 
2 FEWSNET – Somalia Food Security Outlook for October 2017 to May 2018. 
3 UNOCHA (2017). “Humanitarian Bulletin July 2017” 
4 World Bank (2017). Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD). Report No. 123807-SO. 
5 World Bank (2017).  SCD. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
2
 
     
 
revenue from US$170.5 million in 2016 to US$243.7 million in 2017. Despite the remarkable 
improvement, almost 90 percent of total spending goes to security and administrative services, with 
capital spending accounting for just 3 percent of total spending in 2016 and 2017. Somalia relies heavily 
on external assistance for socio-economic infrastructure and services. With an estimated per capita GDP 
of US$535 in 2017, Somalia remains one of the poorest countries in the world.  
 
4. 
The recent drought in 2016-2017 has resulted in a crisis weakening the economy and forcibly 
displacing more people, thereby exacerbating the country’s vulnerability. The prolonged drought which 
began in November 2016 has led to a decline of real GDP growth from 2.4 percent to 1.8 percent in the 
first half of 2017.6 With the increase in food prices, inflation rose from 1.3 percent in 2016 to 5.2 percent 
in 2017.7 The agriculture sector, which underpins the Somali economy, experienced near total collapse 
with crop failures and increased livestock mortality due to widespread shortage of water. This resulted in 
loss of livelihoods for many and has left approximately 6.7 million Somalis – more than half the population 
– in need of humanitarian assistance and displaced more than 915,000 people.8 The majority of the 
drought related displacement is taking place in rural areas with populations moving to urban centers to 
join existing settlements for the internally displaced. Many of the drought-displaced people are settling 
in Mogadishu (232,000 people),9 Baidoa (244,000 people)10 and Kismayo (42,000 people).11 These three 
cities alone host almost 40 percent of the total drought-related displacements.12  
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
5. 
Somalia’s urban population is growing rapidly partly as a result of significant forced migration 
into urban areas caused by protracted conflicts, insecurity, and cyclical natural disasters. Rapid 
urbanization is driven by decades of internal conflicts, insecurity, political turmoil, human rights violations, 
and governance failures in addition to the traditional economic rural-urban migration. These challenges 
are compounded by cyclical environmental adversities such as drought and famine. The country has also 
witnessed a steady flow of returnees and refugees from neighboring countries. From December 2014 to 
January 2018, over 112,000 refugees have returned to Somalia predominantly from Kenya with the 
impending closure of the Dadaab refugee camp.13 More recently, conflict in Yemen has resulted in 37,000 
Yemeni refugees seeking shelter in Somalia.14 Returnees and refugees are settling in urban areas such as 
Mogadishu in the hope of better access to humanitarian assistance, safety, services and job opportunities. 
While it is difficult to produce widely accepted population figures, the current urban population is 
estimated at around 5.2 million people (42 percent) with a growth rate of around 4 percent per annum.15 
If the current trend persists, by 2030, Somalia will add another 4.5 million urban residents to its already 
                                            
6 World Bank estimate.  
7 World Bank estimate. 
8 Drought Impact Needs Assessment (DINA) Executive Summary. 2017. 
9 UNCHR PRMN October 2017. 
10 UNHCR PRMN October 2017. 
11 IPSOS (2017). 
12 Humanitarian Bulletin, July 2017, UNOCHA. 
13 UNHCR (2018). “Somalia: Refugee, asylum-seekers and returnees at 31 January 2018”. 
https://data2.unhcr.org/en/documents/download/62260. 
14 UNHCR (2017). http://data.unhcr.org/yemen/regional.php.  
15 UNFPA (2014). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
3
 
     
 
constrained urban environment, nearly doubling current numbers.16 
 
6. 
Urbanization is one of the most significant drivers of development. If managed well, it can 
provide a pathway out of poverty and act as an engine of growth. In the Somali context, cities are also 
increasingly serving as centers of resilience where people seek refuge. High urban densities can reduce 
transaction costs, make public spending on infrastructure and services more economically viable, and act 
as an economic hub that attracts investments and talent. Furthermore, cities in Somalia are increasingly 
coming to serve as a safe haven or the last resort for those fleeing violent conflicts or natural disasters.  
 
7. 
Yet as urban areas fail to keep pace with the rapid urbanization, Somalia’s cities are becoming 
more fragile thereby threatening the country’s stability. The rapid pace of urbanization has created 
multiple challenges for cities, which are expected to intensify as urbanization continues. Cities have not 
been able to cope with the increased demands for land, housing, basic services, and job opportunities. As 
a result, cities are sprawling in an uncontrolled manner, slums are on the increase, and environmental 
degradation is accelerating. It is feared that large influxes of people may shift clan dynamics which can 
potentially destabilize already fragile social structures. Protection challenges are also significant in the 
context of ongoing urbanization and displacement. Gender-based violence (GBV), among other protection 
concerns, is a prevalent issue in Somalia and a significant challenge confronting displaced populations in 
particular17. IDPs face increased risks of GBV and sexual exploitation due to limited security in the IDP 
settlements, poor living conditions and limited clan protection. Rapid urban population growth, high 
unemployment rate especially among the youth, income inequality, lack of access to basic services, and 
lack of government ability to cope are all contributing to increased fragility of cities in Somalia. Indeed, 
Mogadishu, Merca and Kismayo have been named the three most fragile cities in the world.18 Urban 
fragility, particularly in the capital of Mogadishu, can have a profound impact on Somalia’s nascent 
stability. 
 
8. 
The Government has limited capacity and resources to address these challenges. District 
governments (which function as municipal governments) have the primary responsibility for providing 
basic services. But capacity and fiscal constraints often limit their ability to undertake basic municipal 
functions, and outside of a few larger cities, these constraints deepen rapidly. Sub-national governments 
are only receiving a small recurrent budget through an inter-governmental fiscal transfer, and staffing is 
generally skeletal with limited capacity. Municipal governments’ own source revenue collection is minimal 
and unstructured. They are dependent on external assistance or private sector for capital investments 
and delivery of services which tends to be ad hoc due to lack of comprehensive urban development plans 
and limited resources.  
 
9. 
The persistent and recurrent nature of the drivers of migration and conflict contribute to 
protracted conditions, which require a holistic resilience-based approach particularly at the city level. 
Cities play a central role in Somalia’s development and security. There is thus an acute need to strengthen 
their resilience. There are various definitions of urban resilience, and various scales to measure it from 
individual to community to national levels. Urban resilience, under this project, is defined as “the 
                                            
16 World Bank staff calculation based on UN-Habitat and CIA World Factbook.  
17 Several studies estimate that roughly three-quarters of survivors are IDPs. 
18 “These are the World’s Most Fragile Cities”. Urban Gateway. http://new.unhabitat.org/news/these-are-worlds-most-fragile-
cities. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
4
 
     
 
municipal governments’ ability to prepare for, respond to, and adapt to shocks and stresses while 
continuing to provide critical services following an adverse event.” External shocks and stresses in the 
Somali context will include both natural disasters and fragility.  
 
10. 
Urban resilience is understood as a holistic concept that comprises five composite dimensions 
- spatial, physical, economic, social, and institutional. First, spatial resilience ensures flexibility in spatial 
plans, policies and land use management systems so as to mitigate and manage possible impacts of 
external shocks. Integration and inclusion of IDP settlements into the urban fabric is an important aspect 
of spatial resilience in the Somali context. Second, physical resilience relates to making the city-level 
infrastructure and service delivery resilient to external shocks, ensuring that they are able to meet the 
increased demands resulting from a large influx of people. Third, economic resilience is understood as the 
ability of the city to manage and adapt to disruptions to the economic system, such as negative impacts 
on assets, production factors, outputs, employment, and consumption caused by external shocks. Fourth, 
social resilience relates to strengthening social capital and social networks to cope and adapt to external 
stresses. Finally, institutional resilience relates to improved local government’s capacity to plan and 
manage the other dimensions of urban resilience including mobilizing necessary resources and creating 
an enabling environment.   
Figure 1. Urban Resilience Framework 
 
 
 
11. 
The SURP complements the current World Bank program in Somalia. Considerable resources 
have been invested in the federal government public sector, strengthening public financial management 
(PFM), institutional capacity, and payment of recurrent costs. Special Financing Facility for Local 
Development (SFF-LD) (P156257), another urban project in Somalia, developed procurement and 
supervision functions at the federal Ministry of Finance and financed small-scale investments across 
Somalia, mainly in smaller secondary and tertiary cities. SFF-LD expanded the use of the PFM system from 
existing recurrent costs to capital investments in the Federal Member States (FMS). SURP will help extend 
the World Bank’s outreach to the sub-national level given the implementing agencies are located at the 
Spatial Dimension
Social Dimension
Insitutional 
Dimension
Physical Dimension 
Economic Dimension 
Urban 
Resilience 
Urban planning 
Land use planning 
Hazard mapping 
Land inventory etc.  
Infra development 
Service delivery 
Land and housing 
Job creation 
Support for 
informal economy 
Biz regulations etc. 
Capacity dev. 
Accountability 
Inter-gov relations 
Tax collection etc. 
Social cohesion 
Participatory gov. 
Support to the 
vulnerable etc. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
5
 
     
 
municipal level, mostly in primary and larger secondary cities. SURP will be supporting funds flows from 
the federal to lower levels of government and strengthening project planning and implementation 
capacity at the municipal level. SURP can be an important instrument to prepare sub-national 
governments for possible inter-governmental fiscal transfers in the future.  
 
12. 
The SURP builds on other ongoing projects supported by various development partners. UN-
Habitat’s work on urban planning and strategic spatial planning in Mogadishu provides useful city level 
information on existing land use, housing, IDPs, infrastructure and service delivery; an urban plan that 
points to the future direction of city growth; and infrastructure/service requirements. SURP will validate 
the selected roads’ strategic importance vis-à-vis the UN-Habitat sponsored urban plan. UN agencies’ Joint 
Program on Local Governance (UN-JPLG) is helping to develop Local Government Laws at the FMS level 
and establishing representative District Councils. UNDP’s Rule of Law Program has established paralegal 
aid and alternative dispute resolution mechanisms involving informal leadership and local NGOs in major 
cities of Somalia, which are anchored under Ministry of Justice. Such a mechanism can be utilized to 
mitigate any potential forced evictions as a result of SURP engagements. USAID financed Transition 
Initiatives for Stabilization (TIS+) supports quick impact stabilization activities at the district and 
community levels with a focus on targeted areas in the FMS.  In Mogadishu, TIS+ has set up community 
institutions at the district level which were used by the Somali Urban Investment and Planning Project 
(SUIPP) (P10374) in carrying out consultations on priority roads. TIS+ has also supported the rehabilitation 
of secondary roads in Mogadishu and the Benadir Regional Administration (BRA)/community 
representatives ensured there was no overlap between the SUIPP/SURP investments and those of TIS+. 
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
 
13. 
The project contributes to the World Bank Group’s (WBG) twin goals of eliminating extreme 
poverty and boosting shared prosperity through provision of much-needed economic infrastructure and 
basic services for some of the world’s poorest and most vulnerable people in one of the most fragile 
countries. The project also contributes to the WBG Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY2019-2022) 
(under preparation) Focus Area 1 which aims to strengthen institutions and expand access to services 
while addressing the cross-cutting consideration of building resilience to fragility and shocks.  
 
14. 
The project will also contribute to the Somalia National Development Plan (2017-2019), 
particularly for the Infrastructure Pillar that aims to “lay out the foundations of resilient infrastructure 
systems that will contribute to the country’s stability and will provide necessary services for all”, as well 
as the Resilience Pillar that aims to “create opportunities for IDPs and refugee returnees to participate in 
public affairs and most importantly in decision-making pertaining to their own future, such as local and 
urban development processes” and to “systematically enhance the absorption capacity of basic services 
for IDPs and returning refugees”.19  
 
15. 
Through the Series of Project (SOP) programmatic approach, SURP aims to achieve the strategic 
outcome of strengthening urban resilience of key cities in Somalia. It will do so by improving municipal 
governance, augmenting cities’ urban planning, supporting economic growth through reconstruction of 
key urban infrastructure, and fostering social cohesion by providing benefits to both host communities 
                                            
19 Federal Government of Somalia (2017). “National Development Plan 2017 – 2019”.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
6
 
     
 
and the displaced.  
 
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
16. 
The Somalia Urban Resilience Project (SURP) will enhance the resilience of select cities by: (i) 
supporting institutional resilience through the strengthening of municipal governance by building capacity 
of local governments, delivering infrastructure and services through sub-national government systems, 
and helping to better define the division of roles and responsibilities between the federal, state, and 
municipal governments in the area of sub-national development and service delivery; (ii) supporting 
physical resilience by financing investments in priority urban infrastructure or services; (iii) supporting 
spatial resilience through forward-looking urban planning; (iv) supporting economic resilience by creating 
short-term income generation opportunities particularly for the urban poor and IDPs through labor-
intensive works and exploring longer-term job opportunities for these groups by collaborating with the 
ongoing World Bank-financed Somali Core Economic Institutions and Opportunities (SCORE) project 
(P152241) for micro-, small- and medium enterprise (MSME) development and vocational training; and 
(v) strengthening social resilience by fostering social cohesion by supporting infrastructure that benefits 
both the host communities and the displaced and ensuring investments are prioritized through a 
participatory decision-making process. 
 
17. 
The SURP is a national urban resilience project that aims to pilot the use of country Public 
Financial Management (PFM) systems at the sub-national level and strengthen municipal governments’ 
capacity. It takes a programmatic approach and will scale up its geographical and sectoral coverage as 
additional funding becomes available. The SURP takes a Series of Project (SOP) approach which would 
allow the project to be scaled up gradually. While the initial interventions will begin in Mogadishu and 
Garowe due to the cities’ readiness, additional funds worth US$21 million have already been secured to 
expand the project to Kismayo and Baidoa, secondary cities that suffer from a rapid and large influx of 
returnees and IDPs. The subsequent phases will also look to strengthening inclusive development by 
better integrating displaced people in an urban setting. The Government has made it clear that it wants 
SURP to expand its geographical and sectoral coverage incrementally as and when additional funds 
become available. Investments in respective cities are small and simple mainly due to budget constraints 
(Somalia’s ineligibility for IDA limits its funding source to the Multi-Partner Fund (MPF)) but also partly 
due to limited government capacity at the sub-national level making large-scale complex investments 
difficult at this stage. The delivery of infrastructure investments through municipalities/district 
governments under SURP will not only provide a means of testing this decentralized service delivery 
model in the context of Somalia but will also help strengthen service delivery capacity at the sub-national 
level for long-term sustainability. It is hoped that successful implementation of this project and 
strengthened municipal government capacity will help catalyze additional development funding to be 
channeled through sub-national government systems.  
 
A. Project Development Objective 
 
18. 
To strengthen public service delivery capacity at the sub-national level and support the 
reconstruction of key urban infrastructure in targeted areas. 
 
19. 
The SURP will do so by: (i) providing capacity building support to the Benadir Regional 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
7
 
     
 
Administration (BRA) and Garowe Municipality and strengthening government systems at the sub-
national level by channeling funds on-budget; (ii) supporting the rehabilitation of secondary urban roads 
in Mogadishu and Garowe; (iii) generating short-term income generation opportunities and improving 
connectivity for the urban poor, IDPs and returnees; and (iv) augmenting the municipal government’s 
planning capacity by financing road connectivity and drainage network assessment in Mogadishu.20 The 
project would support urban resilience, mainly institutional, physical, spatial and economic resilience. The 
achievement of the above objective would support the Government’s efforts to demonstrate visible and 
tangible improvements in the lives of its citizens, critical for strengthening the legitimacy of the 
Government and sustaining social and political stability in the country. 
 
B. Project Components 
20. 
The following three components are proposed for a duration of 36 months: (i) Mogadishu 
Municipality; (ii) Garowe Municipality; and (iii) contingent emergency response. 
21. 
Mogadishu and Garowe prioritized infrastructure investments through a participatory decision-
making process using the criteria below: 
 
(i) 
Strategic investments that contribute to urban resilience. The investment should be aligned 
with a broader strategic plan or vision of the city. This plan should focus on how to make the 
city more resilient.  
(ii) 
Inclusiveness. Investments identified should be as inclusive as possible, i.e. incorporate needs 
of the IDPs, returnees, refugees and host communities.  The investments should be selected 
in a participatory manner in consultations with community representatives.  
(iii) 
Maximizing development impact.  Investments should maximize development impact and 
return on investment, thus avoiding small scale/piece meal investments.  
(iv) 
Coordination/complementarity with ongoing projects.  Investments should avoid overlap with 
ongoing government and development partner interventions and try to complement and 
build on these activities.  
(v) 
Labor intensiveness. Investments should provide short term income generation opportunities 
for vulnerable groups.  
(vi) 
Sustainability. Investments should build in operations and maintenance measures to ensure 
that they are sustained over the long term.  
(vii) 
Government visibility. Investments should be visible to citizens and highlight the 
Government’s (both federal and state levels) lead in implementation so as to strengthen their 
legitimacy.  
Component 1: Mogadishu Municipality (US$6.50 million) 
22. 
Infrastructure. This component will finance the rehabilitation of approximately 19 roads in seven 
districts of Mogadishu, covering an estimated total of 7.5 km. Under the Somali Urban Investment and 
                                            
20 Due to funding limitations, this road connectivity and drainage network assessment is only being carried out in Mogadishu. 
Funds will be sought to expand these assessments to Garowe and other key urban areas.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
8
 
     
 
Planning Project (SUIPP), the preparatory phase of SURP, a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) was 
established within the BRA and capacity of PIU staff strengthened, an institutional assessment of the 
municipality undertaken, and Feasibility Studies, Preliminary Engineering Designs for 31 roads across all 
17 districts of Mogadishu with a total cost of US$6.9 million were prepared. These roads were selected 
based on participatory consultations held in each of the 17 districts that involved the BRA, district councils, 
traditional leaders, and community representatives.21 However, due to funding constraints, only US$4.37 
million including supervision fees is available for road rehabilitation which will finance approximately 19 
roads with a total length of 7.5 km.  This particular package of roads is being selected based on the 
following criteria: (i) strategic importance of the target areas in central Mogadishu; (ii) connectivity to key 
socio-economic facilities such as markets, health facilities, schools, mosques, and district headquarters; 
and (iii) benefit to both urban poor communities as well as IDP communities. The specific roads to be 
financed in the project may be subject to change due to budgetary, security and political economy 
considerations.  
 
23. 
The Feasibility Studies and Preliminary Engineering Designs (PEDs) for these roads were carried 
out during the preparation project – the SUIPP.22  The roads will be accompanied with side drainage to 
mitigate against flash floods that can impact the road investments and pedestrian walkways to ensure a 
larger percentage of the population benefit from the project. As this component cannot finance all key 
primary and secondary roads in Mogadishu, analytical work looking into road connectivity and drainage 
networks within the city is being carried out, which will help the Government identifying and prioritizing 
areas for future investments in these sectors.   
 
24. 
All roads in this component will be constructed using precast concrete interlocking paving blocks 
with properly compacted sub-base and base materials. Such roads have two key advantages: (i) it is labor 
intensive and will provide short term income generation opportunities for communities; and (ii) it would 
allow communities to maintain and repair the roads with minimal training and support. The project will 
ensure that both IDPs and host communities, particularly the poor and the marginalized, equally benefit 
from the short-term employment opportunities. It is estimated that approximately 22,000 person days of 
labor 
would 
be 
generated 
from 
employment 
of 
approximately 
330 
people 
in 
the 
rehabilitation/construction of the targeted 19 roads. Moreover, the project will support the formation of 
Maintenance Committees within each district to supervise and mobilize the community for necessary 
maintenance and repairs. All roads have inverted block concrete open side drainage catered for in the 
detailed engineering designs.  
 
25. 
This component includes the engineering supervision of the civil works contracts by an 
independent engineering supervision firm or agency.  The supervision fees for both Mogadishu and 
Garowe have been included in this component as BRA will be managing the engineering supervision 
consultancy contract for the civil works in both cities. Given that the allocation of funds for road 
rehabilitation is small, the costs of engineering supervision for these roads would be proportionately high 
                                            
21 The community representative groups used were those set up by the USAID funded Transition Initiatives for Stabilization 
project and included participation from women, youth and IDPs groups. The consultations where led by BRA with support from 
the UNOPS community liaison team. 
22 During the SUIPP, it was originally estimated that a unit cost of 1km of road would be US$200,000.  The PEDs however have 
determined that this was grossly underestimated and the cost per 1km is at US$380,000 (almost 90 percent higher than the 
original estimate).  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
9
 
     
 
as there would be minimal economies of scale.   
 
26. 
Capacity Building. This component will also support the capacity building of the PIU in Mogadishu 
with a focus on financial management, procurement and environmental and social safeguards and 
engineering. While basic, these are the areas that are critical for ensuring the implementation of quality 
infrastructure in a transparent and accountable manner, which in turn will help strengthen people’s trust 
in the municipal government’s ability to deliver services. The PIUs are de facto part and parcel of the 
municipalities and on-the-job capacity development of the PIU staff will translate into knowledge transfer 
to the wider municipal staff.  The capacity strengthening builds off from the institutional assessments 
carried out for BRA under the SUIPP.  
 
27. 
To supplement the capacity building activities financed under SURP, concurrent Technical 
Assistance (TA) is being provided to the BRA through funding from the Global Facility for Disaster 
Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR). This TA supports the preparation of a Trunk Drainage Masterplan as 
well as a Road Connectivity Assessment for Mogadishu. The Trunk Drainage Masterplan will map out 
existing trunk drainage systems and identify gaps in their connectivity and develop topography specific 
designs. This will help mitigate unplanned expansion of the drainage system, frequent localized flooding, 
and road shoulder erosion among others. A comprehensive drainage network will also help ensure that 
roads built under SURP are well maintained. The proposed Road Connectivity Assessment will look at how 
the main road network can be developed to improve the connectivity of SURP-financed roads to existing 
and proposed trade and commercial hubs and socio-economic facilities. The proposed activities, together 
with the SURP, will help strengthen municipal governance of BRA and urban resilience of Mogadishu 
through better planning and (re)construction of critical urban roads and drainage systems in the city. Such 
master plans would also enable the BRA to develop Mogadishu city in a more planned and coordinated 
manner going forward and provides the municipality an important tool to maximize limited resources and 
mobilize additional financing for roads and drainage works.  
 
28. 
Operation and Maintenance (O&M). This component will finance the development of O&M plans 
for the road and drainage investments supported under the project including support to the Maintenance 
Committees at the district level. These committees have already been formed by the BRA and TIS+ 
program for the maintenance of secondary roads in the city and are composed of the District 
Administrator, community members, religious leaders and members of the business association. Under 
the SURP, the composition of these committees will be revisited to ensure greater inclusivity of women, 
youth and IDPs. Further, the committees will be provided training to better take on their role of informing 
the municipal governments of maintenance needs of the secondary roads and mobilizing and engaging 
community members for day-to-day maintenance such as gutter clearance as required. This component 
will also finance the training of BRA units responsible for infrastructure maintenance, help the 
municipality develop and improve guidelines for the formation process and composition of the 
Maintenance Committees, and support better coordination of the committees’ activities.  Actual 
maintenance of the roads is expected to be financed by BRA and is not allocated for this project due to 
the limited funding available.  
 
29. 
Project Management. Finally, this component will finance project management costs i.e.- staffing 
of the PIU in Mogadishu; audits; establishment and implementation of a grievance redress and feedback 
mechanism (GRM) related to project activities; and monitoring and evaluation of project activities 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
10
 
     
 
including geo-enabled monitoring. Recognizing that various elements of the project could become a focus 
for local disputes, the GRM will be integrated into the design of the project and described fully in the 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM).  
Component 2: Garowe Municipality (US$2.50 million) 
30. 
Infrastructure. This component will likely finance four roads in Garowe covering an estimated 
total of 4.4 km.  The SUIPP phase prepared Feasibility Studies and Preliminary Engineering Designs for a 
total of 19 roads and two bridge investments. Due to funding constraints, however, only US$2.17 million 
is available for the rehabilitation of secondary roads which will cover approximately four of the 19 roads.  
These roads will be prioritized based on the connectivity they provide for both urban poor communities 
and IDP settlements to key socio-economic facilities, high economic internal rates of return and high 
benefit/cost ratio. The specific roads to be financed in the project may be subject to change due to 
budgetary, security and political economy considerations.  
 
31. 
All roads in Garowe will be constructed using Otta seal surfacing with properly compacted sub-
base and base materials designed to support the anticipated traffic loading. This surfacing was selected 
given: (i) it is cost efficient relative to other surfacing options as future resurfacing or maintenance is 
required only every 5-10 years; (ii) it would allow for communities to maintain and repair the roads with 
minimal training; and (iii) it is labor intensive and would provide short term income generation 
opportunities for communities. The project will support the formation of Maintenance Committees at the 
village level in the district to supervise and mobilize the community for necessary maintenance and 
repairs. It is estimated that for the case of the construction of Otta seal pavement, approximately 18,000-
person days of labor would be generated, through short-term employment of approximately 250 people, 
from the rehabilitation/construction of the roads.  
 
32. 
Capacity Building. This component will also support the capacity building of the PIU in Garowe 
Municipality with a focus on financial management, procurement and environmental and social 
safeguards and engineering. These are the areas that are critical for ensuring the implementation of 
quality infrastructure in a transparent and accountable manner. The PIUs are de facto part and parcel of 
the municipalities and on-the-job capacity development of the PIU staff will translate into knowledge 
transfer to the wider municipal staff. The capacity strengthening builds off from the institutional 
assessments carried out for Garowe Municipality under the SUIPP.   
 
33. 
Operation and Maintenance (O&M). This component will finance the development of O&M plans 
for the road and drainage investments supported under the project including support to the Maintenance 
Committees at the district level. These committees have been formed under the UN-JPLG and are 
composed of community members including women, youth, IDPs, religious leaders and members of the 
business associations. Under the SURP, these Maintenance Committees and the composition of these 
committees will be revisited to ensure inclusivity and committees will be further strengthened to take on 
their role of informing the municipal governments of maintenance needs of the secondary roads and 
mobilizing and engaging community members for day-to-day maintenance such as gutter clearance as 
required.  This component will also finance the training of units in Garowe Municipality that are 
responsible for infrastructure maintenance, help the municipality develop and improve guidelines for the 
formation process and composition of the Maintenance Committees, and support better coordination of 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
11
 
     
 
the committees’ activities.  Actual maintenance of the roads is expected to be financed by Garowe 
Municipality and is not allocated for in this project due to the limited funding available.  
 
34. 
Project Management. Finally, this component will finance project management costs i.e.- staffing 
of a PIU in Garowe; audits; implementation of a grievance redress and feedback mechanism (GRM) related 
to project activities; and monitoring and evaluation of project activities including geo-enabled monitoring. 
Recognizing that various elements of the project could become a focus for local disputes, the GRM would 
include the formation of Grievance Redress Committees at the district level and would be integrated into 
the design of the project. The GRM would be described in more detail in the Project Implementation 
Manual (PIM).  
Component 3: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million) 
35. 
This contingency emergency response component (CERC) is included under the project in 
accordance with the World Bank Policy on Investment Project Financing dated November 10, 2017, 
Paragraph 12 and 13 for situations of urgent need of assistance, as a project-specific CERC. This will allow 
for rapid reallocation of project funds in the event of a natural or man-made crisis in the future, during 
the implementation of the project, to address eligible emergency needs under the conditions established 
in its operations manual. This component will have no funding allocation initially and will draw resources 
from the other expenditure categories at the time of activation. If an Immediate Response Mechanism 
(IRM) is established, this component will serve as an IRM CERC to allow the reallocation of uncommitted 
funds from the project portfolio to the IRM Designated Account (DA) to address emergency response and 
recovery costs, if approved by the World Bank.  
 
36. 
In addition to the project components described above, the team will seek to mobilize additional 
funds to undertake analytics to further operationalize the concept of urban resilience. Analytics under 
consideration include: (i) a local political economy analysis at the city-level to better understand the local 
power dynamics which will help improve the design of a meaningful participatory planning process, 
particularly how to ensure that the most vulnerable groups’ voices are heard and better understand the 
levels of access to services among different population groups; (ii) a study to analyze reasons why previous 
infrastructure was not properly maintained and inform the development of an effective day-to-day 
maintenance mechanism for the roads to be financed; (iii) a study on informal economies at the city-level 
to better understand the scale, location, types of industries, income levels, socio-economic characteristics 
and needs of the informal laborers, to examine possible economic opportunities for the urban poor and 
the displaced; and (iv) a citywide land inventory of idle public lands that could be utilized for IDP housing.  
 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
 
37. 
The immediate project beneficiaries will be the residents of the seven districts of Mogadishu and 
the city of Garowe, including those affected by forced displacement (i.e. IDPs, returnees, and host 
communities) where the secondary road rehabilitation and construction is being carried out. In addition, 
approximately 330 people in Mogadishu and 250 people in Garowe will benefit from short-term income 
generation opportunities resulting from the civil works of these secondary roads. Finally, the BRA and 
Garowe Municipality staff will benefit from capacity building initiatives in this project.  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
12
 
     
 
D. Results Chain 
 
 
 
38. 
The SOP is anticipated to have a notional overall financing envelope of US$84 million from the 
Somalia MPF and will be implemented over a period of seven years. The first phase targeting Mogadishu 
and Garowe will have a total funding of US$9 million, while the second phase targeting Kismayo and 
Baidoa will have a total funding of US$21 million. It is anticipated that another US$22 million will be 
needed to rehabilitate the remaining secondary roads in 10 districts of Mogadishu as well as the key urban 
roads, US$16 million will be needed to rehabilitate the remaining secondary roads and construct the two 
bridges in Garowe and another US$16 million to finance the sanitary landfill solid waste management 
facility and anaerobic pond liquid waste management system in Hargeisa, which were both prioritized and 
studied under SUIPP.  
 
39. 
The project cost components, categories and allocations for Phase 1 of SURP for Mogadishu and 
Garowe are outlined in the table below. 
 
40. 
The SURP provides for retroactive financing of US$300,000 to cover expenses related to PIU 
staffing and operating costs from March 1, 2018 until project effectiveness. As noted above, the 
engineering supervision costs for Garowe have been included in Component 1 for Mogadishu as the 
contract will be managed by the BRA on behalf of both cities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Project Cost and Financing 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
13
 
     
 
Table 1. Project Cost Table 
Project Components 
Project cost 
MPF Financing 
(US$ millions) 
% Financing 
1. Mogadishu Municipality 
2. Garowe Municipality 
3. CERC 
6.50 
2.50 
0.00 
6.50 
2.50 
0.00 
100% 
100% 
100% 
Total Costs 
 
 
 
Total Project Costs 
9.00 
 
 
Total Financing Required 
9.00 
 
100% 
 
 
F. Series of Project Objective and Phases  
 
41. 
SURP is part of the SOP approach to prepare a time-series of projects supporting the Client’s long-
term development program on urban resilience. The overarching development objective for the SOP is to 
strengthen the capacity of municipal governments to perform core government functions and thus to 
contribute to the strengthening of urban resilience in strategically important cities across Somalia. The 
SOP will build on the lessons learned and achievements from previous projects in the series supporting a 
combination of long-term investment activities along with institutional changes with needed flexibility in 
implementation. SOP was deemed the most suitable approach for the following reasons: (i) it allows 
implementation to be sequenced whereby investments in Mogadishu and Garowe can begin while other 
cities such as Kismayo and Baidoa can commence the preparatory phase under SUIPP; (ii) it allows 
flexibility in implementation and financing approach based on the local capacity and contexts as they vary 
widely across different cities; and (iii) it helps demonstrate the World Bank’s longer-term commitment to 
addressing urban resilience in Somalia. The rationale for the programmatic approach is that institution 
building and urban resilience building efforts, in particular, in fragile states like in Somalia, require a long-
term perspective which cannot be achieved with a single investment operation. Such an approach will 
also allow experimentation and learning while adopting a long-term perspective from the start.  
 
42. 
Phase 1 will target Mogadishu and Garowe with a total financing of US$9 million; Phase 2 will 
target Kismayo and Baidoa with a total financing of US$21 million. Funding for the two phases is already 
secured. Phase 3 which targets the remaining secondary roads and main urban roads and drainage 
network in Mogadishu; remaining secondary roads and bridges in Garowe and solid and liquid waste 
management facilities in Hargeisa is subject to the availability of funding from the MPF.  
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
14
 
     
 
Table 2. Series of Projects Phases 
 
SOP Phase 1 
SOP Phase 2 
SOP Phase 3 
Budget 
US$9 million 
US$21 million 
US$54 million 
Period 
2018 – 2021 
2019 – 2022 
2020 - 2023 
Scope 
Support the reconstruction 
of key urban infrastructure 
and 
strengthen 
public 
service delivery capacity for 
Mogadishu 
and 
Garowe 
municipal governments.  
Support the reconstruction 
of key urban infrastructure 
and 
strengthen 
public 
service delivery capacity for 
Kismayo 
and 
Baidoa 
municipal governments. 
Support the (re)construction 
of key urban infrastructure 
and 
strengthen 
public 
service delivery capacity for 
Mogadishu, 
Garowe 
and 
Hargeisa 
municipal 
governments. 
 
G. Rationale for World Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
 
43. 
The project will be financed by the MPF and projects that it supports is part of the overall aid 
architecture for Somalia. All projects under the MPF are first endorsed by the relevant Working Groups 
for approval by the Somalia Development and Reconstruction Framework (SDRF) Steering Committee.  
SURP has been endorsed by the Infrastructure Pillar Working Group and the SDRF. 
 
44. 
As mentioned above, the SURP builds on other ongoing projects supported by various 
development partners. Coordination and dialogue will continue with other partners throughout project 
implementation to avoid duplication and ensure continued complementarity.  
 
H. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
 
45. 
Use of government systems helps strengthen local government institutions. Putting local 
government in the driver’s seat is particularly important in urban areas where municipal governments 
have the primary responsibility in planning and managing assets and service delivery as well as 
maintaining these assets over the long term. This project will be the first attempt to use government PFM 
systems at the sub-national level in Somalia with the aim of helping to build their capacities and fulfill 
their mandate.  Successful implementation of this project can help both the BRA and Garowe Municipality 
leverage more assistance from other development partners in the future. 
 
46. 
Build in flexibility through a programmatic approach to cope with the fluid context. The context 
in Somalia is very dynamic where any shocks can trigger significant changes on the ground and shift both 
the country and sectoral context in which the project was designed. Moreover, institutional capacity and 
implementation arrangements could differ from city to city due to widely varying local contexts. To allow 
sufficient flexibility in the project to deal with changing contexts, and to enable the project to scale up 
quickly, should additional resources become available, the SURP has adopted a SOP approach. Such an 
approach allows the project to be designed in a modular manner, enabling the project to be implemented 
in smaller increments commensurate with the Government’s capacity while allowing for different funds 
flow or implementation arrangements in different cities. Additionally, the project has included a 
Contingency Emergency Response Component in accordance with World Bank Policy on Investment 
Project Financing dated November 10, 2017, paragraphs 12 and 13, for situations of urgent need of 
assistance. This will allow the project to address any urgent needs that may arise during the course of the 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
15
 
     
 
project implementation. 
 
47. 
An area-based approach is important to mitigate any social tensions. Beneficiary identification 
and needs assessment are difficult in urban contexts, especially when different vulnerable groups such as 
refugees, returnees, IDPs, and poor host communities co-exist. It is not easy to distinguish between the 
chronic needs of the urban poor and the more acute vulnerabilities associated with forced displacement. 
Furthermore, in a densely-populated area where many are in need of support, targeting specific groups 
can lead to increased social tensions and disrupt social cohesion. This is particularly the case in Somalia, 
where there is perception among host communities that IDPs and returnees, often from minority clans, 
are the only people receiving assistance from humanitarian agencies. Therefore, an area-based approach 
benefitting all people in a designated target area is more desirable. To this end, under the project, target 
areas were selected based on pre-determined criteria described above, and investments will benefit all 
groups living in targeted areas.  
 
48. 
Ensure complementarity of development efforts is essential for maximizing impact and 
leveraging limited resources. In FCV countries, there is often a myriad of development partners providing 
assistance in a variety of sectors. Somalia is no exception, though assistance is predominantly 
humanitarian with a focus on IDPs and returnees. To ensure complementarity and reduce the risk of 
duplication, the SURP was not only designed based on a needs assessment but also by mapping existing 
and planned development partner interventions and identifying gaps. Moreover, given the budget 
constraints, rather than providing small-scale multi-sectoral interventions that could be spread out thin, 
investments under the SURP will try to maximize impact by focusing on larger-scale infrastructure in the 
most central areas of Mogadishu that will benefit a large number of people, complement other agencies’ 
ongoing activities and yield substantive impact.  
 
49. 
Participatory decision-making is crucial to foster ownership of the project. For any investment 
prioritization, it is important to adopt a participatory decision-making process to the extent possible 
where all stakeholders such as the Government, IDPs, women, youth, traditional leaders and the urban 
poor have a voice. Such an approach helps generate social cohesion across different groups, improves 
communication between the local government and the communities, and fosters ownership over the 
investments to be provided under the project that can lead to better operation and maintenance. The 
SURP has sought to make the planning approach as participatory as possible given the difficult 
circumstances in Somalia. Political dynamics do not easily allow for a true participatory process and clan 
dynamics generally dictate how decisions are made in Somalia. It is often difficult for vulnerable groups 
that come from minority clans and lower socio-economic status to have their voices heard.  
 
50. 
Provide sufficient capacity support and technical expertise for the PIU and local government 
entities.  Given the dearth of government expertise in project management in extreme post-conflict 
situations, intensive support is needed during the initial implementation phase.  More specifically, 
engineering support is required during the preparation of bid documents and intensive procurement 
support required during the bid evaluation to avoid lengthy delays and poor project performance. The 
World Bank team will comprise of consultants in engineering and procurement who would be available to 
provide hands on support to the PIU team during key stages of project implementation.  
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
16
 
     
 
 
51. 
Utilize third-party monitoring to cover inaccessible areas. Given the persistent insecurity in 
Mogadishu, the World Bank’s movement outside the Mogadishu International Airport to supervise the 
civil works continues to be limited. As such, the World Bank will contract an independent monitoring agent 
for supervision of civil works and verification of project implementation progress. The firm will by 
necessity need to have previous experience working in Mogadishu and capacity to travel regularly to 
project sites.   
 
52. 
Ensure operations take necessary measures to minimize fraud and corruption risks. Fraud and 
corruption are high risks in a conflict-affected context such as Somalia. Measures can be taken to minimize 
risks on the supply side, such as (a) ensuring technical as well as financial audits; (b) publicized information 
for contract bids and project budgets; and (c) establishment of grievance redress and feedback 
mechanisms. These have to be matched on the demand side by strengthening transparency (public 
information on walls and signs), accountability (social audits) and participation (user management 
committees).  
 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
53. 
The proposed SURP will be implemented on behalf of the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) 
by the BRA/Mogadishu Municipality in Mogadishu and the Municipality in Garowe using proceeds from 
the MPF through a Grant Agreement with the World Bank. A Grant Agreement would be signed between 
the World Bank and the Ministry of Finance and the Federal Government would have oversight of the 
project. The BRA and Garowe Municipality will, however, have overall responsibility for project 
implementation in their respective cities. PIUs have already been established within the BRA and Garowe 
Municipality under the SUIPP and reports to the respective Mayors.  
 
54. 
Under SURP, the PIUs will have project management responsibility, coordinating overall project 
implementation, ensuring the timely availability of fund transfer to contractors, implementing the 
relevant safeguard instruments (Environment and Social Management Frameworks, Resettlement Policy 
Framework, Environment and Social Management Plans and Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans) and 
ensuring continuous community outreach and consultation, maintaining project accounts and producing 
financial reports, monitoring and evaluating program implementation and impacts, developing and 
implementing the GRM and reporting results to various stakeholders. The ESMF and RPF have already 
been prepared but the ESMP and Abbreviated RAPs for each road segment will be prepared once the final 
selection of roads has been made. The ESMPs will be prepared by the engineering supervision consultant 
whereas the RAPs would be prepared by the PIUs.  
 
55. 
The PIUs will be supported by a contracted engineering supervision consultant who will be 
responsible for monitoring the contractors of the civil works as well as monitoring adherence to the 
safeguard instruments. The PIUs will also be supported by a third-party/ independent Monitoring Agent 
contracted by the World Bank.  Efforts will be made to explore cost-effective options for third party 
monitoring to ensure this arrangement is sustainable throughout the various phases of the SURP.  The 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
17
 
     
 
third-party monitor will provide quality assurance of the supervision carried out by the engineering 
supervision consultant and carry out spot checks on both the engineering quality of the civil works and 
adherence to the safeguard instruments.  
 
56. 
Given that SURP is following on from the ongoing SUIPP, the PIUs in Mogadishu and Garowe are 
in a satisfactory state of readiness for rapid project implementation. Under SUIPP, the PIUs were staffed 
with a Project Focal Point/Coordinators, Procurement Specialists, Finance Specialists, Project Engineers, 
Environment and Social Safeguard Specialists and M&E Specialists. These positions were all competitively 
recruited. The capacity in the PIUs will continue to be enhanced through training by the World Bank 
technical staff on fiduciary and safeguards issues as well as the engineering supervision firm.  
  
57. 
SURP will be implemented over a period of 36 months.  
 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
 
58. 
A project monitoring system will be established by the PIUs to assess progress on indicators in the 
projects results framework.  Data on activities and outputs will be provided in regular monthly and 
quarterly reports prepared by the PIUs based on inputs from the supervision agent and the Project 
Engineer. To the extent possible, the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be participatory, 
engaging community members of the districts benefiting from the infrastructure investments – including 
women, youth and the displaced.  
 
59. 
A baseline survey and end-line beneficiary survey will be carried out to measure who and to what 
extent people benefit from the infrastructure as well as how it affects their lives in both social and 
economic terms.  The M&E system will target the documentation of case studies capturing the impact of 
the project on communities, taking into account the gender dimension, impacts on vulnerable or 
marginalized groups, inter-communal dynamics between the IDPs and the host communities, and how 
they may ultimately contribute to stronger urban resilience. Such qualitative assessment will also identify 
lessons learned that can feed into the design of other similar projects.   
 
C. Sustainability 
 
60. 
The SURP is the first step in supporting the longer-term relationship between enhanced municipal 
institutional capacity, municipal planning and improved service delivery. Municipal institutions are leading 
the implementation of infrastructure investments that benefits IDPs, returnees and host populations. 
 
61. 
In Mogadishu, the surfacing of the community roads investments will be precast interlocking 
concrete blocks which can be easily maintained by the communities themselves thereby enhancing the 
sustainability of the roads investments. Similarly, in Garowe, the Otta seal pavements can be easily 
maintained by the Garowe Municipality. Maintenance committees responsible for informing the 
municipalities of maintenance needs and mobilizing community members for maintenance work will be 
strengthened. These committees would be provided necessary training by the BRA/Garowe Municipality 
and engineering supervision agent.  
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
18
 
     
 
 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
A. Economic Analysis 
 
62. 
The secondary road investments, pedestrian walkways and solar streetlights supported under 
SURP are likely to result in significant benefits to the population within the seven districts of Mogadishu 
and in Garowe city by improving access to markets and services and providing short term income 
generating opportunities. Pedestrian walkways which will ensure benefits accrue to both motorists and 
pedestrians and solar streetlights will greatly improve safety for all residents.  
 
63. 
In Mogadishu, a total of 31 roads were prioritized across all 17 districts following a multiple criteria 
analysis at the feasibility stage. The criteria for selection of roads included potential economic benefit as 
well as traffic volume, road condition, deterioration rate, constraints to flow of traffic, cost of road 
development, benefits of intervention, socio-economic centers served, environmental impact of the 
selected intervention, population served, poverty level and stakeholder priority. The multi-criteria 
analysis was preferred to an economic analysis as it allowed for wider consultation with the communities 
and local government representatives in selecting the road options. Through this process, it was 
determined that the roads will have positive economic impact on the majority of residents and IDPs by 
improving access to services, which in turn will improve the economic conditions of the local population. 
The implementation and maintenance of the interventions will also create income generation 
opportunities for the local labor market.  
 
64. 
No precise estimate of the economic rate of return has been undertaken and a usual economic 
and financial analysis for this program will be difficult given the paucity of economic data, the ongoing 
conflict in Somalia, and the uncertainty in determining costs and benefits. However, a framework for 
economic analysis will be developed to enable the project to collect data on economic impact during 
project implementation. In Mogadishu, the community roads investments are expected to result in 
significant benefits to the population within the seven districts by improving access to markets and 
services and providing short term income generating opportunities. These densely populated districts 
have several slums and host 90 IDP settlements. Rehabilitation of these community roads will increase 
mobility within the districts and improve access to approximately 140 community facilities. This includes 
improved access to 30 schools, 23 health facilities of which five are public hospitals, 14 sports facilities 
and play grounds.  Rehabilitation of these roads would allow both IDPs and the poor urban communities 
in Mogadishu to have greater access to 13 city markets where they have opportunities to work as laborers.  
 
65. 
In Garowe, priority roads were chosen after carrying out economic analysis using the Highway 
Development and Management Model (HDM-4). The inputs to the model were derived from field 
investigations and available secondary data collected from different organizations for traffic forecasting 
simulations. Some of the inputs included physical characteristics and conditions of existing roads, vehicle 
operating costs, construction cost, vehicle fleet characteristic, and road operations and maintenance 
costs. In the economic appraisal of the project, the expected benefits of the investment established using 
the HDM-4 model included: (i) reduced time spent for travelling from one point to another; (ii) cost savings 
from direct and indirect vehicle operating costs; and (iii) reduced road maintenance costs. The economic 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
19
 
     
 
analysis is one of the criteria used for the selection of the investment road package for the project in 
Garowe.  
 
66. 
The project will also be strengthening infrastructure delivery through municipalities which would 
help build a platform for future service delivery in Mogadishu and Garowe. The SURP is expecting to 
catalyze additional donor funding to be channeled through municipalities which would result in greater 
benefits to citizens of these two cities. Moreover, by helping the Government deliver on its promise to its 
citizens, the project expects to contribute to building state legitimacy and credibility which would 
contribute to longer term peace and security. The end-line evaluation of the project will look into the 
impact of the project on these issues.  
 
B. Technical 
 
67. 
The Feasibility Studies and Preliminary Engineering Designs undertaken under SUIPP have 
determined that the secondary road investments in Mogadishu and Garowe are technically feasible. While 
the World Bank’s mobility was limited, these studies were undertaken by an outsourced firm that was 
able to travel to the specific project sites.  These Feasibility Studies and Preliminary Engineering Designs 
have determined that the costs for the roads are significantly higher than initially estimated given the 
conditions in Somalia with 1km of road costing approximately US$380,000 in Mogadishu and US$400,000 
in Garowe.   
 
68. 
The studies have identified precast interlocking concrete paving blocks to be the best surfacing 
for secondary roads in Mogadishu based on the soil quality tests and given the potential for generating 
short term income opportunities and the ability of communities to maintain the roads themselves with 
little technical support. Due to limited funding, the standardized design width for the roads was kept at 6 
meters although some of the existing roads are much wider. The designs will therefore need to factor in 
curbing edges to both sides of the roads and ensure they are anchored with robustly designed and 
constructed foundations/footings. Road designs provide inverted block concrete open side storm water 
drains to ensure durability of the roads.  
 
69. 
Otta seal, which is an asphalt surface treatment constructed by placing a graded aggregate on top 
of a thick application of bituminous binding agent, will be used in Garowe. The technology will generate 
short term employment, and is cheaper than asphalt since the material and construction specification are 
not as strict as for asphalt. The local construction industry has capacity as they have previously been 
involved in construction of asphalt road in Garowe. Material for the construction roads in Mogadishu and 
Garowe are readily available in Somalia.  
 
70. 
The local construction industry in both cities has been involved in similar road works. While there 
are no official building codes or standard specifications for construction materials in Somalia, the project 
has developed works specifications to ensure quality control. A survey by BRA in Mogadishu identified 
one private company that carries out testing of concrete blocks at a fee and two that manufacture and 
privately test the quality of the precast concrete blocks. BRA has a laboratory that is not functional. The 
project will support BRA to equip the laboratory and have it functional for quality control of the 
construction material used for the secondary roads. Supervision of the civil works will require an 
experienced firm or agency that has previous experience in fragile state environment. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
20
 
     
 
 
71. 
For both Mogadishu and Garowe, a 10 percent infrastructure contingency has been provided for 
any changes during construction. In the Somalia context 20 percent to 30 percent contingency would be 
more appropriate. However, the desire by Mogadishu and Garowe to rehabilitate as many kilometers of 
roads as possible within the limited funding does not allow for a higher contingency. Whereas the designs 
and bills of quantities have been prepared with as much technical information and data as was available 
and with limited field investigations, changes on site during construction are likely. Variations arising from 
unforeseen site conditions and change in quantities could require more budget than the 10 percent 
contingency resulting in cost overrun. In case of cost overruns during construction, and with no 
project unallocated funds, any cost overrun will not be covered by the project. Variation orders to scale 
down the scope of works would be considered at that time. 
 
C. Fiduciary 
 
(i) 
Financial Management (FM) 
 
72. 
The financial management risk is assessed as Substantial. The project will be implemented in 
Mogadishu and Garowe and will utilize the FM arrangements established under the SUIPP.  This involves 
the setting up of Designated Accounts in the FGS and in Puntland for the project as well as a project 
account for Garowe Municipality. Further detail on these arrangements are provided below. There are 
financial management capacity challenges that are likely to affect the project which include weak PFM 
legal framework including rudimentary inter-governmental fiscal relations between the Federal 
Government and regional member states as well as regional member states and municipalities, 
inadequate financial management competencies and internal controls, rudimentary banking 
arrangements amongst others. Various mitigating measures are designed specific to the project and as 
part of other World Bank/Donor engagements in the country. Given the consideration for Use of Country 
Systems (UCS), the project will adopt the UCS in various aspects of the project’s financial management 
including for accounting and reporting, banking, oversight arrangements with the Office of the Auditor 
General and staffing. This will be supported by Technical Assistance (TA) with clear requirement for 
knowledge transfer incorporated in the Terms of Reference. The project would also focus on developing 
PFM capacity as part of the project activities. The project will be supported by the existing PIU 
arrangements for the on-going SUIPP and the External Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS) that have 
benefited from various fiduciary trainings. A detailed description of the project FM arrangements is 
provided in Annex 1.  
 
(ii) 
Procurement 
 
73. 
Guidelines: Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the requirements in the 
Procurement Regulations for Borrowers under IPF: Goods, Works, Non-Consulting Services and Consulting 
Services dated July 1, 2016 (revised November 2017); “Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and 
Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants (revised as of July 1, 2016)”; 
and provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement. Somalia, being a fragile and conflict affected 
country, procurement under the projects will be processed under special procurement arrangements 
referred to in paragraph 12 of the World Bank Policy on Investment Project Financing dated November 
10, 2017. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
21
 
     
 
 
74. 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) and Procurement Plan: As per the 
requirement of the Regulations, the Borrower has developed a PPSD, based on which the Procurement 
Plans for 18 months for Mogadishu and Garowe have also been prepared. The PPSD market survey found 
that there are local road construction companies available in Somalia, who can construct the roads under 
the project and materials for construction are available locally. Finding a qualified engineering supervision 
consultant locally however would be challenging. The Procurement Plans set out the selection methods 
to be followed by the Borrower during project implementation in the procurement of goods, works, non-
consulting services, and consulting services. The Procurement Plans will be updated at least every 12 
months, or as required, to reflect the actual project implementation needs, but each update shall require 
World Bank approval. All Procurement Plans will be publicly disclosed in accordance with the World Bank 
disclosure policy. 
 
75. 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP): The World Bank’s STEP system will be 
used to prepare, clear, and update PPs and conduct all procurement transactions for the project. Staff of 
the PIU have already been trained in using STEP under the ongoing SUIPP. 
 
76. 
A procurement capacity and risk assessment has been carried out by the World Bank for the BRA 
and Garowe PIUs to review the organizational structure and capacity for implementing the project. The 
risk for procurement was considered High but is reduced to a residual rating of Substantial in view of the 
mitigation measures proposed in the Annex 1. 
 
D. Safeguards 
 
(i) 
Social Safeguards 
 
77. 
The overall social impacts of the project are likely to be positive in terms of improved connectivity 
for the urban poor, IDPs and returnees which would reduce travel time and increase access to 
employment and services. The project will also provide short-term labor benefits with the plan to hire 
local labor for the manufacturing, supply and contracting of the concrete road blocks and also as hired 
labor for construction of roads and the bridge. For the latter an estimated 40,000 person days of labor are 
expected to be generated. Possible negative social impacts could be temporary loss of livelihood due to 
displacement of affected shops resulting from construction works, potential marginalization of local 
women or vulnerable goods in selection of beneficiaries from short term labor opportunities and 
increased risk of road accidents during construction. These potential impacts can be mitigated through 
the implementation of the ESMP.  
 
78. 
The rehabilitation and construction of roads will take place in both Mogadishu and Garowe where 
there are several roadside businesses and structures protruding into the proposed roadways. These have 
been documented in the draft scoping studies for both cities, which included photographic evidence of 
the types of structures and likely impacts. While some small roadside structures, such as kiosks or vendor 
tables, may need to be displaced during construction, they will all be able to return once works are 
completed, as the existing right of way is larger than the road carriageway. Thus, there will be no 
permanent land acquisition or resettlement. The Client has also developed a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) to lay out principles and guidelines for the expected eventual preparation of 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
22
 
     
 
Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) which was disclosed in-country and on the Bank’s external 
website on July 6, 2018. An RPF was prepared because the final selection of road segments has yet to be 
made, and may be subject to a number of budgetary, security and political economy considerations. Once 
specific road segments have been selected, the RAPs will document the nature and scale of the impacts; 
number and types of project affected persons (PAPs), entitlement options and outline mitigation 
measures to compensate for these temporary and permanent impacts. The development and disclosure 
of the RAPs is expected by end August 2018 and no construction is permissible until full compensation has 
been affected.  
 
79. 
The baseline and end-line beneficiary surveys and accompanying case studies will be designed so 
as to capture the impacts of the communities taking into account any gender differentiated impacts and 
impacts to vulnerable or marginalized groups, to ensure that lessons learned are translated into positive 
social gains in the event of a possible scale up of SURP.  
 
80. 
A project-level GRM that will handle both resettlement or economic displacement compensation, 
and construction-related grievances will be developed, and included in the ESMF, RPF and will also be 
included in the ESMP and Abbreviated RAPs.  The GRM will be implemented through the formation of 
Grievance Redress Committees (GRCs) at the district level composed of community representatives of the 
affected communities, including traditional leaders or elders. Community members would include 
women, IDPs, youth and kiosk owners.  
 
(ii) 
Environmental Safeguards 
 
81. 
The project has been assigned to environmental screening category “B” because it will rehabilitate 
and upgrade existing roads in Mogadishu and Garowe; therefore, the civil works are expected to have a 
low impact on the biophysical environment near selected roads. Potentially adverse environmental 
impacts - including deposition of solid wastes, dust emission, and health and safety of construction 
workers and communities - are expected to relate mainly to construction activities during project 
implementation and will occur contemporaneously.  The project triggers three social and environmental 
safeguards policies: OP/BP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.11 - Physical and Cultural 
Resources, and OP/BP 4.12 – Involuntary Resettlement and OP/BP 4.04 – Natural Habitats has been 
triggered for Garowe (see Table 3, below). 
 
82. 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical and Cultural Resources is triggered owing to the potential for chance find of 
cultural or archeological significance during construction and the existence of some historic buildings 
around the secondary road investments that could potentially be impacted from the construction. Per the 
ESMF, site specific ESMPs will include measures to protect historic buildings and sites along the roads 
being rehabilitated as well as procedures for chance finds of items of archeological or cultural significance 
during construction. While the potential road subprojects have little to no effect on areas of natural 
habitat, OP/BP 4.04 – Natural Habitats has been triggered for Garowe in the event bridges studied under 
SUIPP are constructed in subsequent phases of the project. The works for these two new bridges would 
be of a larger scale compared to the road rehabilitation works and the location of the two water bodies 
(Tongga-Garowe river and the seasonal Lan Alitrin stream) relative to the physical works warrants 
triggering of OP/BP 4.04.  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
23
 
     
 
83. 
ESMFs for Mogadishu and Garowe have been prepared under SUIPP and detailed site-specific 
ESMPs will be prepared for each road segment to be rehabilitated under the project once the roads have 
been selected. The ESMF, including Executive Summaries in English and Somali have been consulted on 
and was disclosed in- country and on the Bank’s external website on June 29, 2018. All site-specific ESMPs 
will be consulted on, with Executive Summaries disclosed locally in Mogadishu and Garowe in Somali and 
English prior to construction – most likely by August 2018. 
 
84. 
Consultations on the ESMF were held between May 2016 and January 2017. These consultations 
involved project stakeholders such as relevant government agencies (over 65 government officials), 
beneficiary communities (380 community members), organizations residing/operating/having jurisdiction 
within the project area; and World Bank and UNOPS representatives. Consultations on the RPF were held 
in both Mogadishu and Garowe between 21-25 May. In Mogadishu, consultations involved a total of 51 
people including community representatives of the seven districts, women, youth and IDPs as well as 
business representatives. In Garowe, consultations involved 40 stakeholders including community 
members (women, youth, IDPs) and government officials.  
 
85. 
As soon as the road selection is finalized, the project team will start working on the preparation 
of the site-specific ESMPs. The ESMF identifies: (i) policy triggers; (ii) screening criteria to be used for sub-
project identification and selection; (iii) the range of likely environmental and social impacts for those sub-
projects; (iv) measures to mitigate the identified environmental risks/issues; (v) assessment of the 
institutional capacity of the supported agency and measures for filling capacity gaps; (vi) an estimate of 
the budget needed for the implementation of the ESMF and related instruments (i.e. abbreviated RAPs 
and ESMPs); and (vii) a sample ESMP for secondary roads that will be used to prepare the site specific 
ESMPs for works to be financed. The ESMF screening will specifically exclude from financing sub-projects 
that might correspond to Category A projects, or that may trigger additional safeguards policies.  
 
Table 3.  Safeguards Policies Triggered by the Proposed Project 
Safeguards Policies Triggered 
Yes 
No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)  
X 
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)  
X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)  
 
X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09)  
X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)  
X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)  
 
X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)  
X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)  
 
X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)  
 
X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X 
 
(iii) 
Other Safeguards 
 
86. 
No safeguards policies other than those described have been triggered. No environmental and social 
issues other than the ones described are expected to be encountered.  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
24
 
     
 
E. World Bank Grievance Redress Mechanisms  
87. 
Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB) 
supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the WB’s 
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to 
address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to 
the WB’s independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result 
of WB non-compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after 
concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and World Bank Management has been 
given an opportunity to respond.  For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate 
Grievance Redress Service (GRS), please visit http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-
services/grievance-redress-service. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank Inspection 
Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org. 
 
V. KEY RISKS 
 
A. Overall Risk Rating and Explanation of Key Risks 
 
88. 
A full Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (Sort) is outlined in Annex 3; a summary table is 
presented below:  
 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
High 
2. Macroeconomic 
Moderate 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
Moderate 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
Substantial 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
High  
6. Fiduciary 
Substantial 
7. Environment and Social 
Substantial 
8. Stakeholders 
High 
9. Other 
High 
10. Overall 
High 
 
89. 
The overall risk rating for SURP is High. These risks are posed by the challenging operational 
environment, continued insecurity, and inadequate institutional capacity. The World Bank will continue 
to provide intensive supervision and oversight to the PIUs. The PIM outlines clear reporting and 
accountability mechanism and includes guidance to the PIUs on how to address the impact of insecurity 
on the proposed civil works in the project.  
 
90. 
Insecurity risk is High. There are areas in Mogadishu that remain in conflict which affects access 
to locations and insecurity for staff, making monitoring difficult.  Moreover, the security situation may 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
25
 
     
 
prevent or delay the civil works and achievement of project objectives. The project will need to develop 
clear guidelines for addressing insecurity and possibly suspending the civil works. These will be outlined 
in the PIM.  The World Bank’s supervision and oversight of civil works will be carried out through a third-
party monitoring agent.  
 
91. 
Political and governance risks are High. Al Shabab still retains control of territory, particularly in 
rural areas but occasionally launches attacks on key urban areas. The political process, including the 
relationship between the Federal Member States and the central FGS remains fragile. This risk can enter 
the project level with political competition over scarce financial resources. Mitigating measures will 
include regular communication on project activities, allocations and processes with all levels of 
government. All procurements and awarded contracts will be publicly disclosed.  
 
92. 
Technical design risk is Substantial. The planned civil works in the project are not complex 
compared to other roads investments undertaken in Mogadishu and Garowe by other Development 
Partners but this risk is rated as substantial given this is the first time that civil works are being contracted 
and supervised through municipalities. The project will support approximately 7.5km of roads in 
Mogadishu and 4.4km in Garowe. Feasibility Studies and Preliminary Engineering Designs have already 
been prepared for all investments. Both PIUs will be staffed with a Project Engineer to support the 
technical aspects of the road works. The project will also be supported by an engineer on the World Bank 
task team and a contracted supervision agent. The hiring of an experienced engineering supervision agent 
with experience in Somalia will mitigate the risk of implementing the technical designs in a fragile context.  
 
93. 
The institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risks are High. Capacity and 
authority in Somalia is relatively weak given the history of conflict and mistrust with public institutions.  
The preparation project – SUIPP has conformed to the guidelines of the Civil Service Commission and 
ensured the recruitment of qualified consultants in the PIU. These staff will continue to regularly receive 
training and support both through the capacity building component in the project and from the World 
Bank’s task team. Intensive support will be provided at key stages of implementation such as when 
evaluating bids for contractors.  
 
94. 
Fiduciary risks are Substantial.  The financial management and procurement environment in 
Somalia remains challenging.  Levels of mismanagement, fraud, lack of transparency and corruption exist.  
Although anticorruption and public-sector regulations are in place, problems persist, contributing to low 
levels of trust in government institutions. Mitigation measures for governance issues have been built into 
the project design in the form of strict fiduciary control mechanism and application of World Bank 
fiduciary rules as well as a focus on social accountability.  The project will ensure that the PIU always has 
in place dedicated procurement and financial management specialists and that the PIM includes a well 
described fiduciary management process. A Monitoring Agent further supports the MPF projects on 
managing fiduciary challenges.  
 
95. 
Environment and Social Safeguard risk is Substantial.  On the environment side, the civil works 
related to road rehabilitation and the one bridge investment are expected to have low impact on the 
biophysical environment. On the social side, however, the risks are high since there are several structures, 
including those of established roadside vendors, protruding into the roadways. Additionally, project 
activities may exacerbate risks related to persistent social tensions and incidence of violence, in particular,  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
26
 
     
 
sexual exploitation and abuse and other forms of gender-based violence. Mitigation measures will entail 
the implementation of Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans and accompanying consultation, 
compensation and grievance redress measures. The lack of experience of the Somali Government, 
including municipal governments, with managing social and environmental safeguards increases the risk 
of non-compliance with existing processes, and additional support from the team will be deployed. The 
supervision contract will also include provisions for additional levels of scrutiny for environmental and 
social safeguards. 
 
96. 
GBV risks are Moderate. While incidence of GBV in Somalia is a significant contextual challenge, 
preliminary assessment of project-related Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA)/GBV (based on the risk 
assessment tool) is considered Moderate.  Given the context of pervasive insecurity, it is still advised that 
the project adopt a more robust approach to address potential GBV risks. As indicated, relevant mitigation 
measures to address these risks – e.g. integrating Codes of Conduct with SEA/GBV-related protections, 
community consultations and mapping activities to identify potential service providers, and establishment 
of GRM with procedures and channels to enable safe, confidential and ethical reporting of GBV incidents—
will be articulated in the Gender Action Plan of the ESMF. GBV risks should be monitored throughout 
project implementation through regular re-assessment.  
 
97. 
Stakeholders risk is High. The current context in Somalia, the lack of trust between key groups in 
society, and the level of violence, is presenting high risk stakeholder environment for this project.  
Opposition from stakeholders (civil society, private sector organizations, other donors and other members 
of the general public), or districts that have not been chosen for this round of investments are possible.  
This can potentially have a negative impact on the achievement of the PDO.  The BRA, Garowe 
Municipality and the respective Project Coordinators will play a key role in managing communications 
with stakeholders. Moreover, the project’s GRM would help manage grievances from communities and 
the private sector.  
 
98. 
Climate hazard risks are Substantial.   Somalia experiences periods of severe drought which is 
often followed by flash floods.  The worse drought experienced in recent years was in 2011 followed by 
the ongoing one in 2016/2017 which has caused deaths, famine and displacement.  The flash floods can 
have significant impact on the sustainability of secondary roads being rehabilitated in this project. As a 
mitigation measure, the roads that are most at risk of being impacted by floods will include drainage.  
Moreover, regular maintenance through communities is being incorporated into the project design.  
 
 . 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
27  
     
 
VI. 
RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING 
      
Results Framework 
COUNTRY: Somalia  
Somalia Urban Resilience Project 
 
Project Development Objectives(s) 
To strengthen public service delivery capacity at the sub-national level and support the reconstruction of key urban infrastructure in targeted areas. 
 
Project Development Objective Indicators 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
DLI 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
2019 
2022 
To support the reconstruction of key urban infrastructure in targeted areas  
People with access to all season roads within a 500 meter range 
(number, % female, % IDPs, % host communities) (Number)  
0.00 
2,000.00 
Beneficiaries satisfied that infrastructure met their needs 
(number, % female, % IDPs) (Percentage)  
0.00 
90.00 
To strengthen public service delivery capacity at the sub-national level  
Sub projects with post-construction community 
engagement/O&M plans (Number)  
0.00 
23.00 
People’s satisfaction of the municipal government performance 
on road rehabilitation (Percentage)  
0.00 
60.00 
 
PDO Table SPACE 
 
Intermediate Results Indicators by Components 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
28  
     
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
DLI 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
2019 
2022 
Mogadishu Municipality  
Person days of employment created (days, % female, % IDPs, % 
host communities) (Days)  
0.00 
22,000.00 
Maintenance Committees established and functioning (number, 
broken down by IDPs, gender) (Number)  
0.00 
7.00 
Project and Government staff formally trained (Number)  
0.00 
30.00 
Roads rehablitated (CRI, Kilometers)  
0.00 
7.50 
Roads rehabilitated - rural (CRI, Kilometers)  
0.00 
0.00 
Roads rehabilitated - non-rural (CRI, Kilometers)  
0.00 
7.50 
Garowe Municipality  
Project and government staff formally trained (number) 
(Number)  
0.00 
20.00 
Person days of employment created (days,%female, %IDPs, 
%host communities) (Days)  
0.00 
18,000.00 
Maintenance Committees established and functioning (number, 
broken down by IDPs, gender) (Number)  
0.00 
1.00 
Roads rehablitated (CRI, Kilometers)  
0.00 
4.40 
Roads rehabilitated - rural (CRI, Kilometers)  
0.00 
0.00 
Roads rehabilitated - non-rural (CRI, Kilometers)  
0.00 
4.40 
 
IO Table SPACE 
 
UL Table SPACE 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
29  
     
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
People with access to all season roads 
within a 500 meter range (number, % 
female, % IDPs, % host communities) 
 
Quarterly, 
project end 
for endline 
survey 
 
Quarterly 
project 
progress 
reports, 
endline 
survey 
 
Monitoring/site visits; 
focus group discussions 
 
PIU 
 
Beneficiaries satisfied that infrastructure 
met their needs (number, % female, % 
IDPs) 
 
Project end 
 
Endline 
survey 
 
Focus group discussions 
 
PIU 
 
Sub projects with post-construction 
community engagement/O&M plans 
 
Quarterly for 
progress 
reports; 
Project end 
for endline 
survey 
 
Quarterly 
project 
progress 
reports, 
endline 
survey 
 
Monitoring/site visits, 
focus group discussions 
 
PIU 
 
People’s satisfaction of the municipal 
government performance on road 
rehabilitation 
 
End of 
project 
 
Baseline and 
end-line 
survey 
 
Focus group discussions 
 
PIU 
 
 
ME PDO Table SPACE 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
30  
     
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Person days of employment created 
(days, % female, % IDPs, % host 
communities) 
 
Quarterly 
for 
progress 
reports; 
end of 
project for 
endline 
survey 
 
Quarterly 
project 
progress 
reports, 
endline 
survey 
 
Monitoring/site visits 
and focus group 
discussions 
 
PIU 
 
Maintenance Committees established and 
functioning (number, broken down by 
IDPs, gender) 
 
Quarterly 
for 
progress 
reports; 
project end 
for endline 
survey 
 
Quarterly 
project 
progress 
reports, 
endline 
survey 
 
Monitoring/site visits; 
focus group discussions 
 
PIU 
 
Project and Government staff formally 
trained 
 
Quarterly 
for 
progress 
reports; 
project end 
for endline 
survey 
 
Quarterly 
progress 
reports; 
training 
attendance 
sheets 
 
Review of training 
attendance sheets 
 
PIU 
 
Roads rehablitated 
 
Quarterly 
and end 
project 
Quarterly 
progress 
reports, 
Monitoring/site visits, 
meetings with 
engineering supervision 
PIU 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
31  
     
 
 
engineering 
supervision 
consultant 
reports, end-
line survey 
 
consultant 
 
Roads rehabilitated - rural 
 
N/A 
 
N/A 
 
N/A 
 
N/A 
 
Roads rehabilitated - non-rural 
 
Quarterly 
and end 
project 
 
Quarterly 
reports, 
engineering 
supervision 
consultant 
reports 
 
Monitoring/site visits 
 
PIU 
 
Project and government staff formally 
trained (number) 
 
Quarterly 
for 
progress 
reports; 
project end 
for endline 
survey 
 
Quarterly 
project 
progress 
reports, 
training 
attendance 
sheets 
 
Training attendance 
sheets 
 
PIU 
 
Person days of employment created 
(days,%female, %IDPs, %host 
communities) 
 
Quarterly 
for 
progress 
reports; 
end of 
project for 
endline 
survey 
 
Quarterly 
reports, 
endline 
survey 
 
Monitoring/site visits, 
focus group discussions 
 
PIU 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
32  
     
 
Maintenance Committees established and 
functioning (number, broken down by 
IDPs, gender) 
 
Quarterly 
from 
progress 
reports; 
end of 
project 
from 
endline 
survey 
 
Quarterly 
reports, 
endline 
survey 
 
Monitoring/site visits, 
focus group discussions 
 
PIU 
 
Roads rehablitated 
 
Quarterly 
and end 
project 
 
Quarterly 
reports, 
engineering 
supervision 
consultant 
reports and 
end-line 
survey 
 
Monitoring/site visits 
 
PIU 
 
Roads rehabilitated - rural 
 
N/A 
 
N/A 
 
N/A 
 
N/A 
 
Roads rehabilitated - non-rural 
 
Quarterly, 
end project 
 
Quarterly 
reports, 
engineering 
supervision 
consultant 
reports 
 
Monitoring/site visits 
 
PIU 
 
 
ME IO Table SPACE 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
33  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
34  
     
 
ANNEX 1: IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS AND SUPPORT PLAN 
 
COUNTRY: Somalia  
Somalia Urban Resilience Project 
 
1. 
The proposed SURP will be implemented on behalf of the FGS by the BRA/Mogadishu Municipality 
in Mogadishu and the Municipality in Garowe using proceeds from the MPF through a Grant Agreement 
with the World Bank. A Grant Agreement would be signed between the World Bank and the Ministry of 
Finance and the Federal Government would have oversight of the project. The BRA and Garowe 
Municipality will, however, have overall responsibility for project implementation in their respective 
cities. A PIU has already been established within the BRA under the SUIPP and reports to the Mayor of 
Mogadishu.  Similarly, a PIU has been established in Garowe Municipality which reports to the Mayor of 
Garowe.  Under SURP, the PIUs will have project management responsibility, coordinating overall project 
implementation, ensuring the timely availability of fund transfer to contractors, implementing the 
Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans and Environment and Social Management Plans and ensuring 
continuous community outreach and consultation, maintaining project accounts and producing financial 
reports, monitoring and evaluating program implementation and impacts, developing and implementing 
the GRM  and reporting results to various stakeholders. The PIUs will be supported by a contracted 
supervision agent who will be responsible for monitoring the contractors of the civil works. The PIU will 
also be supported by an independent Monitoring Agent that has been contracted by the World Bank to 
provide monitoring support of all projects in the World Bank portfolio.  
 
2. 
Given the SURP is following on from the ongoing SUIPP, the PIUs are both in a satisfactory state 
of readiness for rapid project implementation. In Mogadishu, the PIU under SUIPP is staffed with a Project 
Focal Point, Project Coordinator, Procurement Specialist, Finance Specialist, Environment and Social 
Safeguard Specialist, M&E Specialist and an Administrative Assistant. A Project Engineer is still in the 
process of being recruited. In Garowe, the PIU is staffed with a Project Coordinator, Procurement 
Specialist, Finance Specialist, Environment and Social Safeguard Specialist, Engineer, and M&E Specialist. 
These positions were all competitively recruited. The capacity in the established PIUs will continue to be 
enhanced through training by the World Bank technical staff on fiduciary and safeguards issues as well as 
the supervision firm on engineering.  Details for each officer in the PIU are provided below:  
 
3. 
Project Focal Point/Advisor (Mogadishu). The Project Focal Point will be the primary interlocutor 
for the project with the Mayor of Mogadishu, Secretary General and Deputy Mayor of Administration and 
Finance. The focal point will also liaise with other line Ministries such as the Ministry of Public Works as 
necessary. The focal point will also provide guidance and support to the PIU on any budgetary or fiduciary 
management issues related to the Ministry of Finance. Finally, he/she will liaise with other donor projects 
in Mogadishu to ensure coordination and synergies.  
 
4. 
Project Coordinator (Mogadishu and Garowe). The Project Coordinator will have overall 
responsibility for management of the PIU and PIU team – this includes recruitment of new staff, 
performance evaluations of existing staff and extending contracts as necessary.  The Coordinator will 
ensure the project is implemented in compliance with all fiduciary and safeguard requirements, reviewing 
and approving all reporting on the project for submission to the BRA/Garowe Municipality and the World 
Bank.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
35  
     
 
 
5. 
Project Engineer (Mogadishu and Garowe). The Engineer is responsible for overseeing the 
preparation of bidding documents, being involved in the assessment of bids.  The Engineer is also 
responsible for assessing the quality and progress of implementation of the civil works in close 
consultation with the supervision agent.  
 
6. 
Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist (Mogadishu and Garowe). The M&E Specialist is responsible 
for setting up an M&E system for the project and monitoring the physical and financial progress.  The M&E 
Specialist is responsible for tracking the progress towards meeting the PDO and updating the project 
Results Framework ahead of each Implementation Support Mission. The M&E Specialist will be leading 
the implementation of the baseline and end-line survey. Finally, the M&E Specialist would be responsible 
for helping the Project Coordinator prepare any project reports.  
 
7. 
Environment and Social Safeguard Specialist (Mogadishu and Garowe). The E&S Specialist is 
responsible for preparing the ToRs for the Abbreviated RAP and overseeing its preparation and the 
payment of compensation. Together, with the Project Coordinator, the E&S Specialist is also responsible 
for ensuring compliance of the ESMPs and Abbreviated RAPs.   
 
8. 
Procurement Specialist (Mogadishu and Garowe). The Procurement Specialist (PS) is responsible 
for preparing, implementing and monitoring the project procurement plan. With support from the Project 
Engineer and Coordinator, the PS is also responsible for leading the preparation of all procurement 
documents including bid documents, bid evaluations and contracts and ensuring al procurements are 
carried out through STEP.  
 
9. 
Finance Specialist (Mogadishu and Garowe). The Finance Specialist is responsible for managing all 
project finances, preparing timely financial reports, liaising with the EAFS to process withdrawal 
applications.  
 
10. 
Administration and Finance Assistant (Mogadishu). The Admin/Finance Assistant is responsible 
for supporting the PIU in all administrative tasks.  This includes, among others, arranging logistics for 
project-related activities such as site visits, missions and meetings with international partners.  
 
Financial Management 
 
Country Issues 
 
11. 
A key PFM finding of the 2006-2007 Joint Needs Assessment (JNA) of PFM systems in South 
Central Regions, Somaliland and Puntland was that ‘systems that manage public resources are weak’. 
Similarly, the April 2013 PFM self-assessment which focused mainly on the Federal Government PFM 
activities revealed serious capacity weaknesses similar to those identified by the JNA. However, in 
furtherance to the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness (2005), the Principles for Good International 
Engagement in Fragile States and Situations (2007), the Accra Agenda for Action (2008), and the Busan 
Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation (July 2012), there is deliberate effort as part of the 
New Deal 'FOCUS' and 'TRUST' principles to use country systems. The underlying principle is ‘country-
ownership’ anchored in the “strengthened PFM approach” – a common framework that has been widely 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) 
 
 
 
 
36  
     
 
agreed between the  World Bank and development partners, and is in line with the World Bank’s overall 
approach to strengthening its PFM work. 
 
Project Financial Management System 
 
12. 
Dedicated financial management units (External Assistance Fiduciary Section- EAFS) established 
within the Office of the Accountant General at FGS and Puntland will manage the project’s financial 
management arrangements. The Units have been operational for the last three years and they are charged 
with the responsibility of ensuring harmonization of financial management arrangements for externally 
funded projects using country PFM systems, donor co-ordination to mitigate duplication and proliferation 
of donor funded projects. The EAFS units in consultation with the PIUs across the regions (FGS and 
Puntland) will have overall day to day management of the project financial management arrangements. 
The World Bank will work closely with the authorities to support and strengthen the use of country PFM 
systems without creating parallel arrangements and in line with the provisions of the ‘Somalia New Deal’. 
The FM arrangements will be continuously monitored through frequent FM supervisions and updated to 
reflect the emerging issues in the PFM systems. 
 
Budgeting 
 
13. 
 In each region, the Municipalities PIUs will work closely with e