Document of 
The World Bank 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD2718  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT PAPER 
 
ON A 
 
PROPOSED ADDITIONAL GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 14.3 MILLION 
(US$20 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
AND ON A  
 
PROPOSED ADDITIONAL GRANT FROM SOMALIA MULTI-PARTNER FUND 
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$10 MILLION 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA  
 
FOR THE 
 
DOMESTIC REVENUE MOBILIZATION AND PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
CAPACITY STRENGTHENING PROJECT 
 
 
 
August 29, 2018 
 
 
 
 
Governance Global Practice 
Africa Region 
 
 
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
Exchange Rate Effective June 30, 2018 
 
Currency Unit = Somali Shillings 
 
Somali Shillings 578.5000 = US$1 
US$1 = SDR 0.71094933 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Hafez Ghanem 
Country Director: Bella Bird 
Senior Global Practice Director: Deborah L. Wetzel 
Practice Manager: Nicola J. Smithers 
Task Team Leaders: Sher Shah Khan, Frederick Yankey 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
AF 
Additional Financing  
AfDB 
African Development Bank 
AFROSAI-E 
African Organization of English Speaking Supreme Audit Institutions 
AFS 
Annual Financial Statements 
AG 
Accountant General 
ASA 
Advisory Services and Analytics 
ASPA 
Association of Somali Professional Accountants 
AuG 
Auditor General 
CAATs 
Computer Aided Audit Techniques 
CBS 
Central Bank of Somalia 
CIP 
Capacity Injection Project 
CIPFA 
Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy 
CIT 
Component Implementation Team 
CMU 
Cash Management Unit 
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework 
CSO 
Civil Society Organization 
DA 
Designated Account 
DFID 
Department for International Development 
DRC 
Disaster Recovery Center 
DRM 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization 
DRM & PFM 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity 
Strengthening Project 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
EFT 
Electronic Funds Transfer 
EMP 
Environmental Management Plan  
EU 
European Union 
FCV 
Fragile, Conflict and Violence 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMIS 
Financial Management Information System 
FMS 
Federal Member States 
FY 
Fiscal Year 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service 
GST 
Goods and Services Tax 
HIPC 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 
HWA 
Hargeisa Water Agency 
IBRD 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
ICBF 
Institutional Capacity Building Framework 
ICPAS 
Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Somalia 
ICT 
Information and Communication Technology 
IDA 
International Development Association 
IDI 
INTOSAI Development Initiative 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
 
 
IFI 
International Finance Institutions 
IFR 
Interim Unaudited Financial Report 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
INTOSAI 
International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions 
IP 
Implementation Progress 
IPF 
Investment Project Financing 
IPSAS 
International Public-Sector Accounting Standards 
ISN 
Interim Strategy Note 
ISR 
Implementation Status and Results Report 
ISSAI 
International Standards for Supreme Audit Institution 
JIT 
Just-in-Time 
LTO 
Large Tax-payer Office 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MDA 
Ministries Departments and Agencies 
MoE 
Ministry of Education 
MoF 
Ministry of Finance 
MTI 
Macroeconomics Trade and Investment 
MTR 
Mid-term Review 
NGO 
Non-Governmental Organization 
OAG 
Office of the Accountant General 
OAuG 
Office of the Auditor General 
PAC 
Public Accounts Committee 
PACG 
Pre-arrears Clearance Grant 
PAD 
Project Appraisal Document  
PDC 
Primary Data Center 
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
PEFA 
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
PETS 
Public Expenditure Tracking Survey 
PFM 
Public Financial Management 
PFMCSP II 
Second Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project 
PIM 
Project Implementation Manual 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PL-FMIS 
Puntland Financial Management Information System 
PMF 
Performance Measurement Framework 
PP 
Procurement Plan 
PPSD 
Project Procurement strategy for Development 
PREMIS 
Public Resource Management in Somalia 
PSS 
Puntland State of Somalia 
PSU 
Puntland State University 
RCRF II 
Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase 2  
RCU 
Reforms Coordination Unit  
RIU 
Reform Implementation Unit  
ROC 
Reform Oversight Committee  
RRF 
Rapid Response Facility 
SAI 
Supreme Audit Institution 
SCD 
Systemic Country Diagnostics 
 
 
SCoA 
Standard Chart of Accounts 
SDR 
Special Drawing Rights 
SFMIS 
Somalia Financial Management Information System 
Sida 
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency 
SL-FMIS 
Somaliland Financial Management Information System 
SMEs 
Subject Matter Experts 
SMP 
Staff Monitored Program 
SMPF 
Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
SoE 
Statement of Expenditure 
SORT 
Systematic Operations Risk Rating Tool 
SPF 
Single-partner Fund 
SQL 
Structured Query Language 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
TIN 
Taxpayer Identification Number 
TPU 
Tax Policy Unit 
TSA 
Treasury Single Account 
TSC 
Technical Steering Committee 
UNDB 
United Nation Development Business 
UNOPS 
United Nations Office for Project Services 
USAID 
United States Agency for International Development 
US$ 
United States Dollar 
VAT 
Value Added Tax 
WB 
World Bank 
WBG 
World Bank Group 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206)-
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 66 
 
 
     
 
BASIC INFORMATION – PARENT (Second Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project - P151492) 
 
 
Country 
Product Line 
Team Leader(s) 
Somalia 
Recipient Executed 
Activities 
Frederick Yankey 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Resp CC 
Req CC 
Practice Area (Lead) 
P151492 
Investment Project 
Financing 
GGOAE (9748) 
AFCE1 (6541) 
Governance 
 
Implementing Agency: Ministry of Finance, Puntland, Ministry of Finance of Somaliland Hargeisa, Ministry of Finance 
Federal Government 
 ADD FIN TBL1 
Is this a regionally tagged 
project? 
 
No 
 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
 
No 
 
Approval Date 
Closing Date 
 
Original Environmental 
Assessment Category 
Current EA Category 
07-Jul-2015 
30-Jun-2020 
 
Not Required (C) 
Not Required (C) 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities Parent 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach [MPA] 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[  ] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206)-
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 66 
 
Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to establish and strengthen institutional capacity for the management of 
public funds inCentral Finance Agencies and targeted sectors. 
 
Ratings (from Parent ISR) 
 
RATING_DRAFT_NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation 
Latest ISR 
 
05-Nov-2015 
29-Jun-2016 
29-Jun-2017 
10-Mar-2018 
Progress towards 
achievement of PDO 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
Overall Implementation 
Progress (IP) 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
Overall Safeguards 
Rating 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Overall Risk 
H 
 
H 
 
H 
 
S 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial 
Management Capacity Strengthening Project - P166206) 
 
ADDFIN_TABLE 
Project ID 
Project Name 
Additional Financing Type 
Urgent Need or Capacity 
Constraints 
P166206 
Domestic Revenue 
Mobilization and Public 
Financial Management 
Capacity Strengthening 
Project 
Restructuring, Scale Up 
Yes 
Financing instrument 
Product line 
Approval Date 
Investment Project 
Financing 
IBRD/IDA 
25-Sep-2018 
Projected Date of Full 
Disbursement 
Bank/IFC Collaboration   
 
 
30-Oct-2022 
No 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206)-
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 66 
 
Is this a regionally tagged project? 
 
No 
 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities Child 
 
 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) 
[✓] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
 
 Disbursement Summary (from Parent ISR) 
 
Source of Funds 
Net  
Commitments 
Total Disbursed 
Remaining Balance 
Disbursed 
Grants 
  20.00 
  15.70 
   4.30 
    
 
79 % 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial 
Management Capacity Strengthening Project - P166206) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
SUMMARY (Total Financing) 
 
Current Financing 
Proposed Additional 
Financing 
Total Proposed 
Financing 
Total Project Cost 
20.00 
30.00 
50.00 
Total Financing 
20.00 
30.00 
50.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
0.00 
20.00 
20.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206)-
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 66 
 
DETAILSNewFinEnh1- Additional Financing 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
20.00 
          IDA Grant 
20.00 
Non-World Bank Group Financing 
     Trust Funds 
10.00 
          Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
10.00 
 
   
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Total Amount 
 National PBA 
0.00 
20.00 
20.00 
Total 
0.00 
20.00 
20.00 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
Does the project require any other Policy waiver(s)? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
  
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Governance 
 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206)-
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 66 
 
 
Gender Tag 
 
Does the project plan to undertake any of the following? 
 
a. Analysis to identify Project-relevant gaps between males and females, especially in light of country gaps identified 
through SCD and CPF 
 
No 
 
b. Specific action(s) to address the gender gaps identified in (a) and/or to improve women or men's empowerment 
 
No 
 
c. Include Indicators in results framework to monitor outcomes from actions identified in (b) 
 
No 
 
 
PROJECT TEAM 
 
Bank Staff 
Name 
Role 
Specialization 
Unit 
Sher Shah Khan 
Team Leader (ADM 
Responsible) 
DRM 
GGOAP 
Frederick Yankey 
Team Leader 
PFM 
GGOAE 
Francis Akolu Muthuiya 
Procurement Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Procurement 
GGOPA 
Leonard Mutuku Matheka 
Financial Management 
Specialist 
Fiduciary; PFM & Systems 
Controls 
GGOAE 
Cem Dener 
Peer Reviewer 
Peer Reviewer 
GGOSC 
Edith Ruguru Mwenda 
Team Member 
Legal Counsel 
LEGAM 
Eugenia Nafula Konya 
Team Member 
Administrative Support 
AFMSO 
Fabienne Mroczka 
Peer Reviewer 
Peer Reviewer 
GGOAW 
Gael J. R. F. Raballand 
Team Member 
DRM 
GGOAE 
George Ferreira Da Silva 
Team Member 
Disbursements 
WFACS 
Ikechi B. Okorie 
Team Member 
PFM 
OPSFM 
Jean O Owino 
Team Member 
Disbursements 
WFACS 
Khuram Farooq 
Team Member 
FMIS 
GGOSC 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206)-
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 66 
 
Knut Opsal 
Team Member 
Social Safeguards 
GSU07 
Lucy Anyango Musira 
Team Member 
Operations 
GGOAE 
Matthias Mayr 
Team Member 
Coordination 
AFMSO 
Moses Misach Kajubi 
Team Member 
DRM 
GGOGT 
Naseer Ahmad Rana 
Peer Reviewer 
Peer Reviewer 
GTFOS 
Nicola J. Smithers 
Team Member 
Overall Guidance 
GGOAE 
Richard Anthony 
Sutherland 
Team Member 
DRM, PFM, and Operations 
GGOLP 
Rita Obioma Itoro-Godfrey 
Team Member 
Administrative and Operations 
Support 
GGOAE 
Salome Awuor Aganda 
Team Member 
Administrative and Operations 
Support 
AFMSO 
Sheila Lucrecia Francisco 
Pene Neves 
Team Member 
Disbursements 
WFACS 
Tracy Hart 
Environmental Safeguards 
Specialist 
Environmental Safeguards 
GEN01 
Verena Phipps-Ebeler 
Social Safeguards Specialist 
Social Safeguards 
GSU07 
Yoko Kagawa 
Team Member 
Monitoring & Evaluation 
GGOAW 
 
Extended Team 
Name 
Title 
Organization 
Location 
   
 
   
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) 
 
 
 
 
 
July 30, 2018 
Page 7 of 66 
 
DOMESTIC REVENUE MOBILIZATION AND PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT CAPACITY STRENGTHENING 
PROJECT 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
  I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING ........................................ 8 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING .................................................................... 16 
III. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 23 
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................................. 26 
V. WORLD BANK GROUP GRIEVANCE REDRESS .................................................................. 31 
VI. SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES .................................................................................... 32 
VII. DETAILED CHANGE(S) .................................................................................................... 32 
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 38 
ANNEX 1: AF COMPONENT AND SUB-COMPONENTS BUDGET ESTIMATES ............................ 49 
ANNEX 2: IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS .................................................................... 55 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
 
Table 1: Coordinated PFM support to Somalia governments .................................................... 12 
Table 2: Proposed AF components and sub-components .......................................................... 17 
Table 3: Parent project components captured in the AF ............................................................ 17 
 
Annex Table 1: Component 1 -  Strengthening Tax Policy and Inland Revenue Administration 
(AF=US$12,300,000) ..................................................................................................................... 49 
Annex Table 2: Component 2: Strengthening Capacity for Public Financial Management 
Control and Accountability (AF=US$12,700,000) ........................................................................ 49 
Annex Table 3: Component 4: Public Financial Management Reform Oversight, Coordination 
and Management (AF=US$3,000,000) ......................................................................................... 49 
Annex Table 4: Implementation status of the FMIS modules .................................................... 51 
Annex Table 5: Disbursement Tables .......................................................................................... 60 
Annex Table 6: Procurement Risk and Mitigation Measures ..................................................... 65 
Annex Table 7: Thresholds for procurement approaches and methods ................................... 66 
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
Annex Figure 1: Funds flow arrangements ......................................................................................... 57 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 66 
 
 
I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
A. Introduction 
 
1. 
This Project Paper seeks the approval of the Executive Directors to provide Additional Financing (AF) in 
the amount of US$20 million to the Federal Republic of Somalia for the Domestic Revenue Mobilization and 
Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (DRM&PFM – P166206), funded from the 
International Development Association (IDA) resources, which are available on an exceptional basis as part of 
the Pre-arrears Clearance Grants (PACG) for Somalia. In addition, the proposed AF will have an additional 
financing for US$10 million from the Somalia Multi-Partner Fund (SMPF)1 (TF072283) resources. This will bring 
the total financing of the proposed AF to US$30 million. The proposed AF will include restructuring of the parent 
project Second Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project P151492.  
 
2. 
The AF is being processed at the request of the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) of June 23, 2018, 
to: (i) expand the scope of activities concerning domestic revenue mobilization (DRM); (ii) deepen treasury 
management and budget execution reforms and align them with the 2016-2020 Public Financial Management 
(PFM) Reform Action Plan; and (iii) introduce new activities to enhance fiscal accountability and transparency. 
The AF will continue to benefit the Puntland State of Somalia (PSS) and Somaliland in addition to the FGS. Overall, 
the activities are consistent with the original Project Development Objective (PDO) and are strategically aligned 
with Somalia’s most recent Interim Strategy Note (ISN) fiscal year (FY) 2014-20162, its Systemic Country 
Diagnostics (SCD)3 ,and the forthcoming Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY2019-20224. 
 
3. 
The AF also entails project restructuring to: (i) revise the original PDO to explicitly include the DRM 
support; (ii) consolidate the PFM and integrity-related activities into one component; (iii) reallocate resources in 
accordance with the new design; (iv) amend the Just in Time (JIT) support; (v) revise the results framework and 
monitoring systems to improve the attribution of project specific interventions; and (vi) extend the closing date 
of the original project by two years, from June 30, 2020 to June 30, 2022, to allow for successful implementation 
of the project’s original and new activities. The changes will strengthen the overall development impact of the 
original project and better align the World Bank assistance with the changing government priorities and country 
context. The project is expected to achieve results which include strengthened capacity to formulate efficient tax 
policy, establishment of more efficient inland revenue tax administration organization and systems and 
strengthened PFM and auditing systems. The project is also expected to contribute to higher level development 
objectives of enhanced revenues and more efficient and accountable government spending. The AF support is 
aligned to the key economic reform objectives of the federal government and its member states, as outlined in 
the National Development Plan 2017-2019, and is providing technical and financial resources to the 
internationally-supported state-building process in Somalia. The AF also re-prioritizes expansion of treasury 
                                            
 
1 To be approved by the Africa Region Vice President. 
2 P124647, report number 39951-SO. 
3 P155548, report number 123807-SO. 
4 P165624, report number 124734-SO.  
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 66 
 
management and budget execution activities in accordance with the 2016-2020 PFM Reform Action Plan. The 
operation also supports the Somali Government to meet International Monetary Fund (IMF) Staff Monitored 
Program (SMP), and reforms towards Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative Decision Point. 
 
4. 
The proposed AF is fully compliant with World Bank procedures that are set out for Parent Project-
proposed AF in the context of ongoing, well-performing projects.5 The parent project is currently rated as 
Satisfactory for both progress towards achievement of the PDO and Implementation Progress (IP). All legal 
covenants are met under the original project and there is substantial compliance with financial management 
(FM) arrangements, and with the respective legal covenants. The proposed AF is being processed in accordance 
with the condensed procedures outlined in Paragraph 12 of Section III of the World Bank Investment Project 
Financing (IPF) Policy, and Paragraph 56 of Section III of the IPF Directive: Exceptional Arrangements in Situations 
of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints. The Safeguards requirements will in that regard be deferred 
to implementation as outlined in Paragraph 12(a) of the IPF Policy. 
 
Background and alignment  
 
5. 
Somalia has achieved significant progress in laying the foundations for stability and development; 
however, political and institutional gains must have tangible benefits for people if Somalia’s transition is to 
hold. The CPF for the period FY2019-2022 aims to increase citizens’ access to services and help restore economic 
resilience – laying the foundations for longer-term poverty reduction and inclusive growth. The CPF is based on 
an analytical framework elaborated in the recently-concluded SCD as well as the outcome of country level 
dialogue between the World Bank Group (WBG), its Somalia partners and the international community. 
 
6. 
Recent political and institutional gains reflect a country making a positive transition from acute fragility 
and protracted emergency. Agreement on a new federal structure, two peaceful transitions of power, nascent 
resource sharing deals and a willingness to tackle vested interests - all signal a collective willingness to move 
forward. To secure the new political settlement, Somalia’s emerging federal institutions are working to generate 
dividends for the people, by enabling access to basic services and offering economic opportunities for a fast-
growing population. 
 
7. 
Nevertheless, Somalia’s long period of fragility has given rise to a “dual development trap” reflecting 
systemic distrust, and acute vulnerability to repeated shocks. First, weak fiscal space constrains service delivery, 
including security and justice, leading to low trust in state institutions (further undermining revenues) and cycles 
of political crises. Second, climatic shocks (like the 2017 drought) deplete rural communities’ assets, causing 
displacement and rapid urbanization – resulting in mounting exclusion, and unsustainable exploitation of natural 
resources. The two traps reinforce each other, becoming structural drivers of the country’s sustained fragility.  
Overcoming the dual development trap requires the restoration of citizens’ trust in institutions by strengthening 
accountability and oversight, mobilizing revenue and increasing citizens’ access to services.  
 
8. 
With debt arrears outstanding, Somalia is ineligible for regular concessional financing from IDA and 
other International Finance Institutions (IFIs) – but the WBG re-engagement in 2012 funded by the SMPF has 
helped stabilize institutions and initiate IFI normalization. With support of eleven donors, the SMPF has enabled 
                                            
 
5Following World Bank Procedure, Additional Financing for Investment Project Financing, Issued March 1, 2018. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 66 
 
the World Bank to support the strengthening of federal institutions and establishment of basic economic 
regulatory foundations, including through the DRM&PFM. The SMPF will remain the core financing vehicle under 
the CPF – but will be complemented in FY19 by an exceptional allocation of IDA PACGs targeting the key 
milestones to reach Decision Point under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative. Provided reform 
momentum continues, the Decision Point is feasible within the CPF period, which would allow Somalia access to 
regular concessional resources from IDA and other IFIs, together with investment of private capital from the 
International Finance Corporation (IFC). 
 
9. 
The World Bank’s ongoing Somalia governance operations will be helping Somalia deliver the CPF focus 
of building institutions to deliver services, and ultimately in reaching HIPC Decision Point. Specifically, the 
exceptional access to PACGs will be used to scale-up two ongoing governance projects, namely: The DRM&PFM 
AF, (co-financed by US$20 million equivalent from IDA PACG and US$10 million from SMPF), and the Recurrent 
Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase 2 AF (RCRF)6or “RCRF II7” (co-finance by US$60 million equivalent from 
IDA PACG and US$2 million from SMPF). Fundamentally, the DRM&PFM operation will build upon the 
foundations already laid by the project’s early successes, strengthen the systems for revenue mobilization and 
expenditure management to ensure both increased revenue collection and help for the governments to spend it 
wisely. RCRF will provide recurrent cost finance to provide continued fiscal stability and support the FGS and the 
Federal Member States (FMS) to deliver tangible education and health services to citizens. Working together, 
both operations will contribute to building state legitimacy and an increasingly coherent federal structure for 
service delivery. 
 
10. 
The two operations are being scaled-up in close coordination with other key development partners, and 
at a crucial time for development of public sector systems and coherence. This includes the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) Staff Monitored Program (SMP), the European Union (EU)’s forthcoming budget support 
operations, officially titled the ‘State-building and Resilience Contract’, and other World Bank operations and 
bilateral Technical Assistance (TA) providers. Through this coordinated approach, they help to support Somalia 
on an accelerated pathway towards the HIPC Decision Point. The timing is also very important. The PACGs are 
well timed to enable Somalia to take advantage of the expected more favorable macroeconomic outlook (higher 
growth after the drought, higher domestic revenue) to continue focusing on stabilization and strengthening 
capacity. 
 
Somalia governance program integrated view 
 
11. 
Addressing the multi-faceted governance challenges in Somalia requires the adoption of approaches, 
which are: highly innovative; flexible; and balance between short, medium- and long-term reform strategies 
and manages high transaction costs with multiple clients. The Troika8 of WB Governance-focused projects 
provides a foundation that is premised on the 2011 World Development Report (WDR) with a focus on 
                                            
 
6 P167224, Report No PAD 2958. 
7 P154875, Report No. PAD 1380. 
8 The Troika of Governance-focused projects include: (i) The Capacity Injection Project (CIP) (P149971) with the objective of 
strengthening the staffing and institutional capacity of selected line ministries and central agencies; (ii) the Recurrent Cost and 
Reform Financing Project (P154875), aimed at providing credible and sustainable payroll and to establish the foundation for 
efficient budget execution and payment systems for the non-security sectors; and (iii) the PFM Capacity Strengthening Project 
(P151492) which focuses on improving the institutional capacity of central finance agencies. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 66 
 
strengthening legitimate institutions and governance as a sin-qua-non for the provision of security, justice and 
jobs for citizens – all of which are central to breaking the cycles of violence and setting the path towards economic 
development.  
 
12. 
The Somalia Governance program therefore takes an integrated view and an iterative approach - 
starting with the SMPF funded pilots and using the IDA PACG to scale up - that considers the strengthening of 
core institutions of government as fundamental.  This is achievable through: (i) transparent and sustainable 
support to civil service salary payments – this serves as a mechanism for legitimizing the Government; (ii) the 
strengthening of DRM and PFM system – via support for an effective core DRM and PFM system; strong oversight 
including the engagement of citizens; and (iii) merit-based recruitment and enhanced capacity of civil servants.  
As such, the Troika of projects provide an integrated and interdependent set of broader governance solutions 
and incentives aimed at governance and public-sector systems improvement.   
 
B. Description of the existing project and its performance  
 
Somalia Second Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (PFMCSP II) (P151492) 
 
13. 
Original approval and restructuring. The PDO of the original project is ‘to establish and strengthen 
institutional capacity for the management of public funds in central finance agencies and targeted sectors.’ The 
parent project in the amount of US$20 million was approved by the Africa Regional Vice President on July 7, 
2015, and has been effective since September 2015. A US$20 million grant from the SMPF is the current sole 
source of financing. The original closing date was June 30, 2018. However, the project was restructured to extend 
the closing date by two years, from June 30, 2018 to June 30, 2020. The extension was approved on December 
7, 2017. The project’s geographical scope (FGS, PSS, and Somaliland was decided through coordination with the 
Department for International Development (DFID) and the EU and in harmonization with their programs of PFM 
support in southern Somalia, ensuring national coverage of PFM support. Such coordination, in particular 
includes: Public Resource Management in Somalia (PREMIS) –DFID, EU; and Support for the FGS to Strengthen 
Domestic Revenue Generation and Macroeconomic Management for Customs reforms (DFID, United States 
Agency for International Development [USAID], and EU). Coordination among key partners for PFM and DRM 
support to government is ongoing through government-led Pillar Working Groups under the Somalia 
Development and Reconstruction Facility as well as through technical level exchanges to ensure comprehensive 
accountability and integrity-related support across Somalia. 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 66 
 
Table 1: Coordinated PFM support to Somalia governments 
Note: *RCRF - focused capacity development to manage RCRF funds. 
Note: **PREMIS - DFID/EU project support for PFM and DRM. 
 
14. 
Overall performance. Currently, the IP, progress towards the achievement of the PDO, and performance 
of most project components are rated as Satisfactory. The Government is very committed to the project’s 
continued successful implementation. Although the fiduciary arrangements remain adequate, the FM 
arrangements will further be strengthened as part of the project specific fiduciary arrangements as well as overall 
PFM capacity strengthening activities under the project. The project has no overdue audits, supervision reports 
or IFRs. Likewise, FM, procurement, project management, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) are rated as 
Moderately Satisfactory as reflected in the last Implementation Status and Results Report (ISR) dated March 10, 
2018. Smooth project implementation has translated into high disbursement rate for the parent project funds, 
which stands at a current disbursement ratio of about 79 percent as of August.  
 
15. 
The parent project has achieved tangible results. The components and progress are described in more 
detail in Annex 1. Some of the key results include:  
 
a) The Somalia Financial Management Information System (SFMIS) configuration has enabled the 
FGS’s Office of the Accountant General (OAG) to improve its day-to-day treasury functions 
substantially, including to scrutinize payment transactions more effectively. Also, it has improved 
transparency and accountability in revenue collection and has set the foundations for the 
implementation of the cash management and Treasury Single Account (TSA). Furthermore, the 
payment module has been extended to the Central Bank of Somalia (CBS) to allow integration. As a 
consequence, for the first time FGS recorded the 2015 budget in the system, resulting in the 
generation from the system of the budget utilization and revenue performance reports as well as 
Interim Unaudited Financial Report (IFRs) for World Bank financed projects. 
 
b) The capacity assessment of Supreme Audit Institution (SAI) - FGS Office of the Auditor General 
(OAuG) - is at an advanced stage. In addition, a framework for collaboration with the media and 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 66 
 
non-state actors—which is a crucial element towards promoting outreach for the work of the 
Public Accounts Committee (PAC)—has been finalized. Moreover, the OAuG has over the past few 
months developed a Strategic and Operational Plan, with the help of the International Organization 
of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI) Development Initiative (IDI), to provide direction on the 
medium to longer term goals over the period 2017-2020. Similarly, in PSS, Strategy and 
Development Action Plan for the OAuG has been completed, and the OAuG is conducting three pilot 
audits using the newly developed Risk Based Auditing procedures manuals. 
 
c) The PFM Staff Professionalization activities are successfully completed for the FGS, PSS, and the 
Somaliland Government. As a result, 53 percent (126 out of 239) registered students passed the 
certificate level PFM examination. Similarly, 59 percent passed the procurement stream certificate 
level examination. The PSS has followed up with immersion of the participants. As seven of these 
students have been employed under the Work Bank-supported projects. Likewise, 36 (of 45) civil 
servant students enrolled for the international Chartered Institute of Public Finance and 
Accountancy (CIPFA) examinations at the Puntland State University (PSU) passed the certificate level 
examination.  
 
d) DRM TA support has made improvements in the efficiency and effectiveness of tax administration 
with the broader expectation of enhanced domestic revenue collection.  
 
C. Rationale for the Additional Financing  
 
16. 
Somalia’s development trajectory has improved in the last few years, and there is a real opportunity 
for Somalia to reach the HIPC Decision Point during the next three years. Reaching Decision Point is a stated 
objective of Somalia’s leadership, to unlock access to the World Bank’s IDA window and other sources of 
concessional financing. However, this will require sustained and strong commitment to reform and stability.   
 
17. 
Somalia is in urgent need of assistance due to protracted fragility, extremely low fiscal capacity, 
inequitable geographic distribution of resources, and the need for a ‘step change’ in assistance to support the 
FGS in reaching Decision Point. Despite progress at Federal level on revenue generation, both the FGS and FMS 
remain subject to chronic fiscal stress, with low revenues, and fluctuating grants from international partners. 
Similarly, expenditure management remains weak, as reforms critical to minimizing the accumulation of arrears 
and enhancing fiscal discipline remain outstanding. 
 
18. 
With satisfactory progress with the implementation of the parent project, the FGS requested for AF of 
US$30 million for the DRM&PFM operation to address fiscal constraints, sustain the reform effort to help reach 
HIPC Decision Point, and increase the emphasis on DRM&PFM institutional strengthening. For this purpose, 
the DRM&PFM proposes to:  
 
a) scale up and expand some carefully chosen project activities. The AF is a necessary response to 
the emerging needs of Somalia and is considered crucial for the full achievement of the project’s 
development objectives. To this end, the Government is requesting to restructure the project to: (i) 
upgrade the revenue administration sub-component into a new standalone component that would 
include, inter alia, activities to enhance “readiness” of the FGS and the FMS to implement and 
operationalize the new revenue legislation upon its enactment; (ii) consolidate and deepen PFM 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 66 
 
related activities, including to: re-prioritize and expand treasury management and budget execution 
activities in accordance with the 2016-2020 PFM Reform Action Plan; introduce activities to 
enhance fiscal accountability and transparency via improving the institutional effectiveness of the 
SAIs of FGS, PSS and Somaliland, thus strengthening audit and external oversight capacities; 
strengthen internal control systems by establishing and operationalizing modern internal audit 
functions, strengthening government procurements systems and enhance the overall fiduciary 
environment; and (iii) include a mechanism that rapidly responds to the FGS’s need for more flexible 
and adaptive operational support to help seize windows of reform opportunities as they emerge;  
 
b) support the project’s restructuring as the evolving government priorities and emerging technical 
concerns require an informed response. Notwithstanding the achievements of the project, 
Somalia’s fiscal situation continues to face challenges. In addition, the added complexity of changing 
internal and external dynamics are already influencing the nature of the PFM reform program. 
Consequently, there is need to revise the project’s implementation timeline, scope, costs, and 
approach to achieving the development objectives; and  
 
c) improve other aspects of the original project as the design can be simplified around three 
components instead of six, while resources could be reallocated to better respond to emerging 
needs. Similarly, to facilitate successful implementation of the expanded activities under the AF, the 
closing date will be extended to June 2022. Likewise, the restructuring would also involve 
improvements to the results framework and monitoring systems. In particular, results indicators are 
to be refined to improve the attribution of project specific interventions. Furthermore, the wording 
of the PDO will be revised to reflect the expanded DRM scope.  
 
19. 
With regard to DRM, the Government’s strong commitment to strengthening its institutional capacity 
for mobilizing and managing public funds is potentially a game changer, and is already yielding promising 
results. Domestic revenue collection has increased markedly from US$76 million in 2013 to US$143 million in 
2017. At 4 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), tax revenues are, however, not adequate to support 
Somalia’s reconstruction and development agenda, and the FGS remains dependent on development partners 
to finance capital expenditures. While federal revenues have increased over the last five years, gains have been 
made mainly based on increased trade taxes (customs), whereas inland revenue remains untapped. In addition, 
inland revenue has little support, if at all, by other development partners.   
 
20. 
With regard to PFM, substantial progress has been made to improve budget execution—the variance 
between actual and originally budgeted primary expenditure has reduced from a baseline measure of 45 
percent in December 2013 to 31 percent in December 2017. Yet, expenditure management remains weak, as 
reforms critical to minimizing arrears and enhancing fiscal discipline remain outstanding. At the same time, there 
has been little progress on achieving targets to reduce the time to submit audit reports to Parliament. While the 
project has delivered very useful and relevant analytical work throughout implementation, there is a need to 
ensure that TA reform recommendations are translated into tangible actions that can spur growth in DRM and 
strengthen PFM.  
 
21. 
In this context, the FGS leadership is strongly committed to remaining ‘on track’ under the third IMF 
SMP as well as with RCRF reform benchmarks and, in particular, the quantitative targets relating to revenue 
mobilization and non-accumulation of arrears. Also, access to PACG is a major step and intends to accelerate 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 66 
 
reforms required for IDA arrears clearance, and to help restore resilience. It is in this context that the project is 
expected to make a substantial contribution to the achievement of higher level objectives of increased inland 
revenues and improved quality of public spending.  In addition, the adjustments are considered necessary for 
ensuring that the project beneficiaries can effectively consolidate the gains of the project.  
 
22. 
The proposed AF is considered the most appropriate mechanism to maximize development impact of 
the expanded activities for two main reasons: (i) the scope of the scale-up can be accommodated in the context 
of the original project, relying on the beneficiaries’ existing implementation capacity and project management 
arrangements; and (ii) the proposed AF brings greater procedural, time, and cost-effectiveness gains for the 
Government vis-à-vis preparing a new IPF operation. Comparatively, the proposed AF ensures greater synergies, 
efficient resource deployment, and better attribution of results. Furthermore, the activities are consistent with 
the original PDO, and are strategically aligned with Somalia’s most recent ISN (FY2014-2016), its SCD, and the 
forthcoming CPF. 
 
23. 
There are no significant changes in fiduciary, social safeguards or other design aspects of the project 
since it was appraised. The external audit report for Fiscal Year 2016 highlighted weaknesses in the management 
of project vehicles which required close monitoring, particularly the refund of unauthorized disposal of project 
vehicles by a beneficiary institution. However, the refund has since been processed by the authorities and funds 
credited back to the trust fund.  
 
24. The environmental category of this project is assessed as “B" due to funding allocated for the completion 
of an annex to the Ministry of Finance (MoF) building in Mogadishu. 
 
D. Higher-level Objectives to which the Project Contributes 
 
25. 
Somalia has achieved significant progress in laying the foundations for stability and development; 
however, political and institutional gains must have tangible benefits for people if Somalia’s transition is to 
hold. Somalia’s emerging federal institutions are working to generate dividends for people, by collecting and 
managing public resources to enable access to basic services that offer economic opportunities for a fast-growing 
population.  The proposed AF is aligned with the key economic reform objectives of the FGS and FMS, as outlined 
in the National Development Plan 2017-2019, and is providing technical and financial resources to the 
internationally-supported state-building process in Somalia. 
 
26. 
The proposed AF will support the CPF focus area of building institutions to strengthen the systems for 
revenue mobilization and expenditure management to enable both increased revenue collection and spending 
these resources wisely and in an accountable manner for the benefit of the citizens. The support provided will 
establish and strengthen the processes and automation for selected inland revenue instruments to enable these 
instruments to become operational and so collect revenue. The proposed AF will monitor inland revenue 
collections and will draw on this to inform project implementation. In addition, the proposed AF re-prioritizes 
the PFM and integrity-related activities to accord with the 2016-2020 PFM Reform Action Plan. The systems for 
strengthened expenditure controls and accountability that the AF is expected to deliver will provide mechanisms 
to enable compliance with aggregate expenditure targets, use of funds for intended purposes, and oversight of 
spending. The operation also supports the Somali Government to meet the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
Staff Monitored Program (SMP), and reforms towards Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative Decision Point. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 66 
 
27. 
The project is being scaled-up in close partnership with other key DPs, and at a crucial time for 
development of public sector systems and coherence. This includes the IMF SMP, EU’s forthcoming budget 
support operation, officially titled the ‘State-building and Resilience Contract’ – and other World Bank operations 
and bilateral TA providers. Collectively they help to support Somalia on an accelerated pathway towards HIPC 
Decision Point. The timing is also very important. The PACGs are well timed to enable Somalia to take advantage 
of the expected more favorable macroeconomic outlook (higher growth after the drought, higher domestic 
revenue) to continue focusing on stabilization and strengthening capacity, as well as the conditions-based 
phasing out of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and an associated potential scale-up of funding 
through country systems, making investment in strengthening government resource management systems highly 
strategic at this time. 
 
II. DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
28. 
The proposed AF and restructuring entail the following changes:  
a) Modification of the PDO to reflect the expanded scope of the project and new emphasis on DRM;  
b)  AF allocation of $US12.3 million to substantially scale up of project activities to strengthen tax policy 
and inland revenue administration, which is potentially a ‘game changer’ as inland revenue has great 
revenue generation potential but has received little support up to now;  
c) Consolidation of the PFM and integrity related activities into one component of US$12.7 million;  
d) An additional allocation of US$3.0 million to extend project management and coordination support in 
accordance with the new AF activities and extended timeline; 
e) Redesigning the JIT (Component 6) into Rapid Response Facility (RRF) US$2.0 million;  
f) Adjustments to the results framework and monitoring to reflect the changes in the project’s design; 
and 
g) Extension of the project closing date from June 2020 to June 2022 to allow for successful 
implementation of the project’s original and new activities. 
 
29. 
The PDO is changed to reflect the expansion in scope of the project and the new emphasis on DRM and 
on public funds accountability, as follows: 
 
x 
Original PDO: To establish and strengthen institutional capacity for the management of public funds in 
central finance agencies and targeted sectors.  
x 
Revised PDO: To strengthen systems of domestic revenue mobilization, expenditure control and 
accountability in the Federal Government, Puntland State of Somalia, and Somaliland. 
 
30. 
The relationship between parent project structure and that of the AF is shown in Table 2 and Table 3. 
Table 2 provides the overview of the proposed AF component structure, while Table 3 summarizes how the 
components and sub-components of the parent project are now reflected in the AF structure. 
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 66 
 
Table 2: Proposed AF components and sub-components 
 
Table 3: Parent project components captured in the AF  
 
AF Components
US$'000
Component 1
Strengthening Tax Policy and Inland Revenue Administration systems
12,300
Sub-component 1.1 Improving organizational capacity for tax policy
750
Sub-component 1.2 Improving systems for inland revenue administration
10,250
Sub-component 1.3 Tax payer education and facilitation to promote voluntary compliance
1,000
Sub-component 1.4 Supporting the Revenue Bill consultations and bridging operationalization upon enactment
300
Component 2
Strengthening Capacity for PFM Control and Accountability
12,700
Sub-component 2.1 Strengthening systems of treasury management, budget execution, procurement, accounting 
and financial reporting
6,550
Sub-component 2.2 Strengthening the integrity systems
4,050
Sub-component 2.3 Professionalization of PFM staff
2,100
Component 3
Rapid Response Facility
2,000
Component 4
PFM reform Oversight, Coordination and Management
3,000
TOTAL AF
30,000
Parent Project Component
Parent 
Project 
Allocation 
US$'000
AF Component/ 
Sub-
component
Change
1. Inland Revenue Administration, Planning and Budget preparation
2,750
Substantially expanded inland 
revenue  support provided in 
AF Component 1
1.1 Strengthening planning and budgeting
630
Completed
1.2 Strengthening Inland Revenue administration
2,120 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4
2. Treasury Management, Budget Execution, Procurement, Accounting 
and Financial Reporting
9,880
Consolidated into AF Sub-
Component 2.1
2.1 Treasury Management and Budget Execution
1,500
2.1
2.2 Accounting and Financial Reporting
1,000
2.1
2.3 Concessions, procurement and contract management
1,000
2.1
2.4 Bespoke financial management information systems (FMIS)
4,380
2.1
2.5 Modernizing CBS banking operations and financial control environment
2,000
2.1
Reduced scope 
3. Strengthening the Integrity Pillar
1,945
Consolidated into AF Sub-
Component 2.2
 3.1 Foundations for Supreme Audit Institution (SAI)
1,795
2.2
3.2 Planning, Finance and Public Accounts Committee
150
2.2
4. PFM Professionalization
1,000
2.3
Becomes AF Sub-Component 
2.3
5. PFM Reform Oversight, Coordination and Management
2,925
4
Becomes AF Component 4
6. Demand Driven Just-in-Time (JIT) Bank-Executed
1,000
Becomes AF Component 3
6.1 Social accountability and open government data
500
3
6.2 Governance/PFM Reviews and advisory notes
500
3
Unallocated
500
Total Parent
20,000
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 66 
 
31. 
The components and sub-components of the AF are described below.  
 
32. 
Component 1: Strengthening Tax Policy and Inland Revenue Administration systems (US$12,300,000). 
This component is expected to strengthen tax policy and selected9 inland revenue10 systems and capacity. It 
substantially expands the support to inland revenue and incorporates parent project Sub-Component 1.2.  The 
component includes sub-components described below   
 
33. 
Sub-component 1.1: Improving organizational capacity for tax policy (US$750,000). This sub-component 
includes: (i) establishing the tax policy unit (TPU) in the MoF by supporting activities to crowd in support for the 
TPU, definition of structure and job specifications, definition of linkages to the Attorney General’s office and 
support in establishing legal or regulatory frameworks for access to tax payer and other data, and (ii) support 
TPU in development of a credible and fair revenue policy, evidence based research, revenue forecasting, and tax 
gap analysis capacity.  
 
34. 
Sub-component 1.2: Improving systems for inland revenue administration (US$10,250,000). This sub-
component includes the following:  
 
a) Operationalizing large tax payer office (US$250,000): This will include re-tooling the Large Tax-
payer Office (LTO), people capacity, and organization structure, and will supplement the IMF’s TA 
to establish the LTO.  
 
b) Business process mapping and redesigning (US$250,000) (initially focusing on the LTO processes 
and gradually covering the whole spectrum and ensuring standardization): This will include review 
of existing business processes, and development  and implementation of  more efficient processes 
and systems for: (a) registered tax payer base; (b) risk-management; (c) timely filing of declaration; 
(d) timely payments; (e) accurate reporting in declaration, business intelligence and audit; (f) 
dispute resolutions; (g) revenue reconciliation, refunds and arrears; and (h) transparency and 
accountability of the administration including integrity management. 
 
c) Modernizing and automation11 (US$9,500,000): This will include: (a) development and 
implementation of integrated automation system user requirement specifications and Information 
                                            
 
9 The FGS has prioritized specific tax instruments including: Sales Tax; Excise Duty; Personal and Corporate Income Tax; Rental 
Income Tax; Road Tax; Stamp Duty; Registration fee / levies, turnover tax. A draft Revenue Bill has been developed and is being 
processed to reform policy and administration of the above specific instruments. All the above taxes have been introduced in 
Somaliland. Goods and Services Tax (GST) will be introduced soon.   
10 This scope of the support is limited to Inland Revenue, and based on the division of labor amongst development partners. 
Support to Customs reforms is being supported under a program mainly financed by DFID. However, the Bank will deliver Advisory 
Services and Analytics (ASA) and TA activities to complement DFID support. Using the RRF, the project is structured to take 
advantage and plug any emerging gaps in improvements to the Customs performance. This should help sustain dialogue around 
a major revenue stream for Somalia. Structural benchmarks under consideration by IMF include the following areas with 
accompanying TA to be provided by the IMF: sales tax for domestic products/services (e.g. telecoms, utilities), turnover tax for 
large taxpayers, submission of National Revenue Bill to parliament, fisheries licensing implementation, large and medium 
taxpayer office implementation. 
11 Support for automation shall be at FGS and later rolled out to PSS if PSS adopts the revenue bill.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 66 
 
and Communication Technology (ICT) strategy; (b) financing and supporting deployment of a fit-for-
purpose integrated tax administration system fully interfaced with SFMIS, and procuring necessary 
ICT equipment and infrastructure; and (c) training and change management strategy to facilitate 
adoption of the system by both staff and taxpayers. 
 
d) Capacity building (US$250,000): This includes: (a) development of a human resource management 
strategy for the inland revenue department; (b) execution of a training needs assessment and 
development of a skill development strategy; (c) development and implementation of a 
communication strategy; and (d) delivery of the knowledge and skill sets following the successful 
PFM and procurement accreditation program of the parent project. In this regard, two pivotal 
elements will underpin this support. Firstly, complementing African Development Bank (AfDB) 
support which is setting up infrastructure for a Somalia Revenue Academy, the AF will develop 
curriculum and equip trained trainers to facilitate continuous professional development for staff. 
Secondly, the skill development of the tax officials will among others adopt an accreditation model, 
learning from the (PFM) certification, which has been successfully implemented by the parent 
project, and including personal and supervisory skills development to facilitate effectiveness of the 
institution.  
 
35. 
Sub-component 1.3: Tax payer education and facilitation to promote voluntary compliance 
(US$1,000,000).This sub-component will include development and implementation of: (i) taxpayer orientation/ 
socialization program; (ii) taxpayer service charter; (iii) facilitation and grievance redressal help-desk; (iv) 
proactive disclosure of revenue performance reports; (v) tax forums; (vi) training curriculum; and (vii) utilizing 
the Somalia Revenue Academy to equip the wider public with tax compliance skillsets and knowledge.  
 
36. 
Sub-component 1.4: Supporting the Revenue Bill consultations and bridging operationalization upon 
enactment (US$300,000). This sub-component includes: (a) support for FGS-led Revenue Bill12 consultation 
process with the FMS; (b) support to selected FMS to implement the enacted revenue law, in addition to PSS and 
Somaliland that are already in the project scope; and (c) analytical work on revenue assignment and unbundling 
issues following the revenue bill consultation, and to help operationalization upon the enactment. In this regard, 
this support will supplement the revenue related dialogue at the Inter-Governmental Fiscal Forum which is 
receiving ongoing support from the RCRF Project. In doing so, the sub-component will build on findings and 
recommendations of the analytical work that was produced by the parent project. Also, given the substantial 
support at the FGS level by the AfDB, the World Bank’s Macroeconomics Trade and Investment (MTI) Global 
Practice, and DFID, implementation of Component 1 will be coordinated particularly with these, and other 
relevant key stakeholders. Finally, the project will consider development and implementation of the Medium-
Term Revenue Strategy, likely in the beyond 24 months of effectiveness timeframe once the government-led 
follow up of the revenue enactment becomes clear. 
 
37. 
Component 1 will support both the FGS (US$9,300,000) and PSS (US$3,000,000). The Government of PSS 
will prepare an Annual Work Plan, in consultation with the FGS. The Annual Work Plan is expected to specify the 
activities to be implemented in PSS in a given year, costings, deliverables, with clear targets and indicators that 
directly contribute to the PDO. The planned activities for PSS will be appraised as part of the Annual Work Plan, 
                                            
 
12 The bill development is being supported by the IMF SMP. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 66 
 
which will be reviewed and approved by the Bank.  
 
38. 
Component 2: Strengthening Capacity for Public Financial Management Control and Accountability 
(US$12,700,000). This component consolidates the support for PFM and integrity systems in Components 2 and 
3 of the parent project into one component.  The consolidated Component 2focuses on: (i) the implementation 
of critical treasury management, control, budget execution, public procurement and accounting and reporting 
reforms; (ii) deepening reforms targeted at enhancing transparency and accountability in the use of public funds 
through strengthening key integrity pillars including SAIs, external oversight capacities, internal control systems, 
and the overall fiduciary environment; and (iii) expanding the reach of the government’s PFM staff 
professionalization program. The consolidated Component 2 will have three sub-components, and these 
components are described in broad terms to allow flexibility for activities to be undertaken under the original 
and new envisaged activities. These components are as follows:  
 
39. 
Sub-component 2.1: Strengthening systems of treasury management, budget execution, procurement 
accounting and financial reporting (US$6,550,000). This sub-component (incorporating parent project 
Component 2) is expected to institute essential controls needed to promote fiscal discipline, transparency, and 
accountability. At the FGS level, the additional resources will be used to ensure integrity of the SFMIS by 
supporting the quality assurance of the SFMIS and throughout the system’s implementation and post-
implementation phases, including Primary Data Center (PDC), and Disaster Recovery Center (DRC) that assure 
the timely recovery of data in case of any mishap. The AF will also support sustainable management of the SFMIS 
through targeted institutional capacity building programs. Such programs will support the recruitment of a PFM 
expert to support the OAG throughout implementation of accounting policies and procedures. TA will also 
support the implementation of government cash management policies. Besides this, the AF will finance a 
sustainable, skills transfer focused capacity development plan to ensure sustainability of the SFMIS. Specific 
training will include: (i) Windows Server Management Training (Phase 1) and (ii) completion of the Phase 2 
training plan on Structured Query Language (SQL) Server Management.  
 
40. 
Given the importance of ensuring integrity of the FGS’s financial information, there is a need to support 
SFMIS business continuity and disaster management plans, especially in the areas of information security 
policy, strategies, and procedures (including functionality to support attachment of transactions supporting 
documentation). There will also be need for independent quality assurance to affirm whether the business 
processes are accurately mapped into the applications in line with specified user and business requirements, and 
adherence to the system’s overall implementation and governance framework. Furthermore, to enhance 
transparency and accountability, support will be provided to prepare unified reporting formats for use by the 
FGS and FMSs for reporting on fiscal transfers. As part of the strengthening the comprehensiveness and all-
inclusive nature of the budget to focus on the critical needs of citizens, the team will engage with the FGS and 
participating FMS on the need for citizens involvement in the budgeting process and pilot the process when 
modalities have been agreed and documented.  
 
41. 
In PSS, additional resources will provide hands-on TA support to the OAG in areas such as financial 
reporting and expenditure management and control. Given the criticality of the Puntland Financial Management 
Information System (PL-FMIS) to improved transparency, the AF will also support a systems audit to review 
potential gaps and data integrity issues that could endanger sustainability of the solution. The AF will also support 
capacity building activities targeted at improving expenditure management and control, including 
implementation of government cash management policy.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 66 
 
42. 
In Somaliland, the additional resources will be deployed to specifically support the Government to 
undertake the following: (i) FM TA to the OAG focused on expenditure controls, cash management, accounting 
and reporting; (ii) implementation of business process reengineering, including change management; (iii) 
implementation of Somaliland Financial Management Information System (SL-FMIS) quality assurance, system 
security, business continuity, and disaster recovery strategies; (iv) implementation of a cash management policy 
and establishment of a Cash Management Unit (CMU) at the office of the AG, amongst others. To sustain 
progressive rollout of the SL-FMIS, foster ownership, and ensure sustainability of the original IT infrastructure 
provided by UN-Habitat, the AF will support a post-implementation assessment of the SL-FMIS infrastructure. 
This will include configuration and installation of Citrix Servers and post-implementation technical support. In 
addition, the AF will likewise support implementation of SL-FMIS system security, business continuity, and 
disaster recovery strategies for Somaliland. The AF support will involve interim back-up option such as cloud 
disaster recovery, and private network connection to facilitate easier access to the SL-FMIS servers. 
 
43. 
Important to note is that the CBS is currently managing Sub-component 2.5 of the parent project which 
includes Financial Accounting Control and Transactional System (FACTS) and Automated Transfer System 
(ATS+) with inbuilt: (i) real-time gross settlement (RTGS); and (ii) automated clearinghouse (ACH); and (iii) instant 
funds transfer (IFT) functions. This sub-component was not considered as part of the PFM Reform Action Plan. 
With this understanding, the scope of support under the AF will be limited to the completion of ongoing FACTS 
activities. Subsequent support to the CBS for the implementation of balance of FACTS and ATS+ activities will be 
financed through the ongoing Somali Core Economic Institutions and Opportunities Program (P152241). 
 
44. 
The sub-component also supports strengthening of public procurement. Specifically, it will provide 
advisory support regarding concessions contracting, procurement processes and contract management. 
 
45. 
Lastly, the sub-component will introduce a new activity: Modernization of the Internal Audit function. 
Internal Audit is an essential component of a well-functioning internal control system, and over time it is 
expected to play an important role in evaluating the effectiveness of control systems within the Government’s 
strategic operations. As part of the ongoing business process review, pre-audit of vouchers should be the direct 
responsibility of the expenditure or payment section. Given the importance of Internal Audit, the AF will be 
supporting the operationalization of internal audit functions across the three regions (FGS, PSS and Somaliland). 
Initially, the Internal Audit function will be focused in undertaking risk-based systems audit, including projects 
activities at the FGS and States level. 
 
46. 
Sub-component 2.2: Strengthening the integrity systems (US$4,050,000). This sub-component 
(incorporating parent project Component 3) is expected to enable publication of timely and quality audit reports; 
improvement in the percentage of expenditures represented by the Government entities audited as part of total 
public expenditures; and better follow up by Parliament of audit recommendations. It supports institutional 
strengthening of the Supreme Audit Institutions of the FGS and FMS. The AF will support delayed SAI 
strengthening activities to fast track the audit of projects and Government-wide Annual Financial Statements 
(AFS), while also building capacity of the SAIs as follows: 
 
a) In FGS, with the support of the IDI, the SAI has developed its strategic plan, which seeks to lead it 
to meet the INTOSAI requirements for SAIs; the AF will support some of the strategic goals in 
collaboration with other participating partners. 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 66 
 
b) In PSS, the AF will support a review of the Audit Law number 15 of 2000—which is currently based 
on the judicial system—to ensure alignment with INTOSAI and reflect the modern mandate, 
structure, and roles of the SAI. This extant legal framework is needed to ensure sustainability of the 
ongoing reforms discussed earlier. In addition, there is need to develop and implement capacity 
building approaches to ensure sustainability beyond the project. This will include twinning 
arrangements with more mature SAIs, on-the job training, access to peer learning, and experience 
sharing. The project has also supported the OAuG to acquire audit management information system 
and tools to facilitate its use of such technics to audit Ministries Departments and Agencies (MDAs) 
financial statements prepared using the PLFMIS. As a result, the OAuG will be required to use these 
systems to carry out its audits including centralized project audits.  
 
c) In Somaliland, the scope of support to the OAuG has been limited to the following activities due 
to the initial financing gap. Going forward, engagement with civil society organizations (CSOs) and 
non-state actors will be valuable in deepening accountability of public resources to ensure that the 
oversight roles of both the OAuG and the PAC are well anchored. The AF will therefore support the 
development of a framework of engagement with CSOs, leveraging non-state actors to monitor the 
quality of public expenditures and strengthening their impact in exercising public oversight. As in 
the case of PSS, the AF will continue to support Somaliland SAI institutional strengthening activities 
to fast-track the audit of projects and Government-wide AFSs across the three regions. 
 
47. 
Separately, the sub-component will introduce “Centralized project audit” to support the project’s 
annual and interim audits, and will extend periodic performance monitoring across areas of limited/remote 
access (including emerging States). These new activities are motivated by the lessons learned from the twinning 
arrangement between the OAuG and audit firms providing TA in the audit of SMPF/Single-partner Fund (SPF)-
funded projects. In implementing this activity of the sub-component, the relevant cost-benefit analyses will be 
undertaken to evaluate the pros and cons of engaging individual practicing auditors compared to firms. The AF 
will seek to formulate strategic linkages with regional Professional Association Organizations. In line with the 
design of the original project, the AF will support establishment of a national Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants of Somalia (ICPAS) and its membership to Pan Africa Federation of Accountants and International 
Federation of Accountants. These activities were not undertaken initially because of the resource constraints. 
Government officials working across key PFM institutions and registered as CIPFA students will be encouraged 
to register under appropriate ICPAS membership classification. 
 
48. 
Sub-component 2.3: Professionalization of PFM staff (US$2,100,000). This sub-component (incorporating 
parent project Component 4) provides support to expand the government’s professionalization of PFM staff 
program. The AF will help train more cadres and work with the FGS and the FMS to ensure these qualified 
candidates are posted to the right functions and grades in the civil service. The project will gather gender data 
relating to this training to ensure a fair balance is accorded. This component will also explore the need to support 
some of the outstanding candidates, who may want to further their education to gain a fuller professional 
qualification. With limited funding, this will be carefully reviewed during implementation and a quality-based 
criterion established prior to its introduction. The PFM Reform Coordination Unit (RCU) will coordinate activities 
to assist the Association of Somali Professional Accountants (ASPA) to evolve as a Professional Accountancy 
Organization. To achieve this, the AF will finance the development and implementation of an action plan to meet 
the standards of the International Federation of Accountants as well as Statement of Membership Obligations. 
The ASPA will be used as a platform for Continuing Professional Development of like-minded PFM professionals 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 66 
 
and also for exercising oversight of its members.  
 
49. 
The PSS government has requested that the implementation of PFM staff professionalization activities 
in PSS financed under the SMPF (TF0A0388) be managed directly by the PSS MoF. This request is supported by 
the commitment of the PSS which is evidenced by the considerable number of qualifying CIPFA and International 
Training Centre of the International Labor Organization graduates absorbed within the Puntland Civil Service 
especially its PFM institutions, as well as the development of a PFM Academy within the PSU. This approach is 
aligned with the WB’s Capacity Development Strategy that encourages the use of domestic institutions as a 
sustainability strategy. The implementation of this sub-component therefore is aligned with the Capacity 
Injection Project and its support to the establishment of the Puntland School of Public Administration. 
 
50. 
Component 3: Rapid Response Facility (US$2,000,000). This component replaces parent project 
Component 6. The RRF will provide JIT support, responding to the authorities’ request for a flexible window 
within the project to respond to emerging DRM and PFM priorities in a timely manner, without the need to 
reallocate project proceeds or for project restructuring. Access to the RRF will be based on a set of transparent 
criteria that align with the project objectives, and will be the decision of the Technical Steering Committee (TSC) 
chaired by the FGS Minister of Finance. The RRF will support the three governments—FGS, PSS, and Somaliland 
- and finance: (i) consultants; (ii) services; and (iii) consultations, workshop and focus-group discussions; and (iv) 
training to the staff of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in environmental and social safeguards 
management. The activities and expenditures funded through the RRF will be subject to the project’s 
implementation arrangements and reporting requirements. 
 
51. 
For the FGS, the first activity to be funded by the RRF will be construction completion of the MoF 
building estimated at US$1,400,000. Reestablishing a functional MoF building is a pre-requisite to strengthening 
the Ministry’s capacity for DRM. The Bank will engage with Government to explore contracting options to finalize 
the pending works activities for the MoF building, including contracting through a United Nations Agency.  
 
52. 
For Somaliland, the first activity to be funded by the RRF will be a needs assessment for development 
and implementation of an integrated automation system, including user requirement specifications, ICT strategy, 
financing for procuring necessary ICT equipment and infrastructure. The second activity will be an e-payment 
system for inland revenue, providing a short term solution based on the existing money transfer system in 
Somaliland, including ICT and geo-enabling technology.   
 
53. 
Component 4: Public financial management reform oversight, coordination and management 
(US$3,000,000). This component incorporates parent project Component 5 and augments its financing to extend 
project management and coordination support for the three governments—FGS, PSS, and Somaliland - in 
accordance with the new activities and extended timeline.  
 
III. KEY RISKS 
 
54. 
Overall Project Risk (High): Somalia remains a high-risk context for institution building and development 
financing. The risks include political contestation among key political and economic partners (resulting in conflict) 
and fiscal pressure on the budget from a wide array of needs across the country and recurring external shocks. 
At the project level, risks include weak PFM Legal framework compounded by limited access to the client/projects 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 66 
 
sites; a rudimentary and weakly regulated banking sector, and weak PFM institutional and human capital 
capacities. The in-depth knowledge gained by the World Bank’s project team during the implementation of the 
parent project over the last several years has led to the adoption of measures that contribute to mitigating the 
high level of country and implementing entity risks, including close monitoring through the use of a Monitoring 
Agent, enhanced implementation support and appropriate funds management arrangements, and are discussed 
further below. The overall risk to the project achieving its objectives over the three years is judged to be high, 
due to high political and governance, macroeconomic and fiduciary risks.  
 
55. 
Political and Governance (High): Risk of political instability remains high and could slow or derail reforms 
over the course of the AF. The government’s reform trajectory remains positive, but is costly in terms of political 
capital for the current administration. Improving governance, and tackling corruption, are key demands from 
domestic and international partners, yet, the political space for reform is uncertain with domestic and regional 
pressures on the Government. A key risk is that the reform trajectory is slowed down due to intra-governmental 
and inter-governmental contestation around the assignment of authority in the ongoing constitutional review 
process, among the federal government institutions and between FGS and the FMS.  In addition, political 
economy risk will be heightened over the course of the project as consequential and high-level decisions will 
occupy the client’s agenda. The constitutional review process, the AMISOM transition and security sector reform, 
federal elections in 2020, and state-level elections each year towards and beyond 2020, as well as increased 
regulatory activity on the federal level will impact on the emerging formal institutional framework, and the 
informal networks currently providing space for reform.  
 
56. 
These risks are being managed through a range of World Bank engagements. The proposed AF for the 
RCRF project, taking place alongside this project, is investing in inter-governmental institutional frameworks 
aimed at providing a conducive environment for constructive inter-governmental relations. Furthermore, the 
RCRF project supports inter-governmental transfers between the FGS and FMS which further support a 
consolidation of the political compacts between the different levels of government, and provides additional 
confidence-building features, such as inter-governmental transfers based on participation in inter-governmental 
institutions, support to the IGFF, and TA to education and health service delivery through FMS. This project 
reinforces the RCRF support for strengthening intergovernmental institutional framework, by collaborating 
across DPs to ensure coordinated reform support on DRM, PFM and accountability institutions to all FMS as well 
as FGS.  They will be further mitigated by leveraging policy dialogue and client engagement through support for 
the Financial Governance Committee and other Bank-finance operations.  
 
57. 
Macroeconomic (High): The macro-economic risks remain high due to limited, yet increasing, ability of 
the Government to react to external shocks to the nascent formal economy. Despite important and wide-spread 
reforms, the Federal Government’s fiscal position remains weak due to the limited ability to generate domestic 
revenues, the weight of security sector expenditures in the budget, and the pressure to increase fiscal transfers 
to subnational units and FMS. Consequently, the authorities are at risk of structural over-reliance on external 
grant-financing.  Somalia’s growth prospects are also dependent on external remittances, and on export 
revenues from only a few commodities (mainly livestock) which make them vulnerable for example to disease or 
trade bans. Furthermore, the introduction of the new currency set for 2019 will create further challenges to 
sustaining macroeconomic stability.  The key mitigation of macro-fiscal risk is the ongoing work - jointly with 
other development partners, including the IMF - to support increased DRM, including through this AF. The 
proposed EU budget support operation will further provide fiscal space to mitigate against shocks and provide a 
more predictable fiscal basis over the coming years. The World Bank is also supporting the modernizing of the 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 66 
 
Central Bank of Somalia banking operations and financial control environment, which is expected to contribute 
to a more robust framework for financial flows 
 
58. 
Technical Design of Project or Program Risk (Substantial): The technical design of the project is straight 
forward and has been streamlined to reduce the number of components from the parent projects’ six (6) to four 
(4). However, the AF will continue to support multiple PFM institutions and departments across FGS, PSS and SL. 
Implementation of financial management information systems (FMIS) are generally difficult with challenging 
implementation modalities. Technical Design or Project Risk is therefore still rated as Substantial and will 
continue to be mitigated through strong coordination among the participating PFM institutions, as well as the 
oversight arrangements to support close supervision of activities, comprehensive monitoring and reporting and 
the constant engagement of the World Bank’s team with the client.  
 
59. 
Institutional Capacity for the Implementation and Sustainability (Substantial): The RCU within MoF will 
continue to be central for coordinating the AF, with clearly aligned responsibilities and procedures. The scaling 
up is expected to result in enhanced resources at the RCU, including one DRM reforms officer and a procurement 
officer. These additional resources will support the Coordinator given the scaled-up DRM scope of the project. 
The institutional capacity risk is assessed as Substantial because it includes some potential sensitive reform 
agenda that changes the way business is done across government. To mitigate this risk, the project will 
strengthen further collaboration through increased monitoring of the quality and timeliness of the Technical 
Steering Committee (TSC) and Reform Oversight Committee (ROC) mandated activities– both of which are central 
elements of the projects governance arrangement. These efforts are expected to ensure the sustainability of 
reform outcomes. Substantial training and on-the-job capacity building activities especially at the CIT level, which 
are currently budgeted for within the existing project and the AF, including workshops and training activities, will 
be undertaken. Furthermore, the new actors involved with the AF activities have been briefed on accelerated 
protocol procedures and teamed up with existing players within the project to deliver the desired objectives. 
 
60. 
The project will leverage lessons learned from the implementation of Phases I and II of the PFMCSP, 
client feedback at the mid-term review (MTR) for the Governance troika, and associated analytical work. To 
this end, a two-pronged conflict sensitive approach is based on lessons from Fragile, Conflict and Violence (FCV) 
situations. Such an approach comprises of the: multi-tracked implementation; and reallocation flexibility across 
components. The multi-track approach envisages simultaneous implementation of short term (3-12 months), 
medium term (12- 24 months) and long term (beyond 24 months) reforms, to ensure that the short-term results 
are aligned, and contribute to the long term institutional development vision. In doing so, the short-term support 
will target government-led reforms based on the existing legal environment. The medium-term support will 
target enhancing preparation readiness for the enactment of the revenue bill as well as related PFM reforms. 
The long-term support will target bridging gaps to help operationalize such laws upon enactment. The flexibility 
to reallocate across components enables reallocation of resources from slow moving activities to fast moving 
activities, without recourse to reallocate project proceeds or project restructuring as the case may be. Such 
flexibility is imperative, in view of the project evolving implementation environment on the request of the 
authorities. This flexible design is expected to enable the project to adapt to a rapidly changing national context 
and evolving priorities within the project scope.  
 
61. 
Fiduciary (High): The fiduciary risk rating for the existing operation is rated substantial. The AF’s Fiduciary 
risk rating is assessed as High, largely due to the Country and Implementing entities’ weak PFM and DRM Legal 
framework and risks related to civil works, including financing for the completion of the MoF building, limited 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 66 
 
access to the client/projects sites, rudimentary unregulated banking sector, weak PFM and DRM institutional and 
human capital capacities. Appropriate risk mitigation measures including periodic extended implementation 
support activities complemented by close monitoring will be undertaken in addition to providing “on the ground” 
PFM/fiduciary capacity support to the country PFM oversight institutions as well as the project as a whole. The 
World Bank and mandated Government PFM institutions will continuously monitor the banking and funds flow 
processes and take appropriate actions to strengthen the funds flow, disbursement and banking controls and 
mitigate highlighted risks  The layered approach to risk, which has functioned well for increasing levels of 
disbursements since 2014, will be continued--the World Bank will continue to: maximize disbursements under 
the project directly to vendors, minimizing Designated Account (DA) balances; intensify FM monitoring through 
reconciliation of project and bank accounts and deployment of a monitoring agent in-country; and support 
capacity building of the country PFM oversight institutions including the OAG and OAuG.   
 
62. 
Stakeholders Risks (Substantial): Public Sector Reforms, especially in the areas related to DRM and PFM, 
involve changes that will affect the interests of different stakeholders and likely to have “winners and losers”. In 
situations where the interests of respective parties are incompatible, or where other stakeholders cannot or will 
not accept a common position, this can undermine reform objectives. Some of these risks can be mitigated by 
investing in a prior understanding of the power dynamics, interests and influences among different stakeholders 
which in turn can help the reformers to navigate and reconcile varying positions that may otherwise impact on 
the project. Broad consensus for the reforms will also ensure durability, noting that all stakeholders are important 
but different stakeholders must be managed differently. Key constituencies such as parliamentarians, the media, 
CSOs, Think-Tanks and academia will continue to be meaningfully engaged to play their role in minimizing these 
risks. 
 
63. 
Other Risk (High): Additional context-specific risks not captured in the other categories include insecurity 
related risks. Insecurity poses a risk to human security (WB staff and client), project implementation and its 
sustainability. It can create limitations on access to the operating environment, which in turn poses additional 
project risks, creating challenges for project implementation and monitoring. Insecurity can further discourage 
vendors from accepting assignments under the project and slow down the pace of reforms. Security costs can 
also significantly increase the overall cost of the project implementation and related reforms. As part of the risk 
mitigation approach, the World Bank team operates in close consultation and guidance provided by WBG 
Corporate Security and United Nation Department of Safety and Security, which includes on the ground security 
support. In addition, the World Bank has contracted with security firms in all areas where the project – and wider 
World Bank portfolio – is active to help manage the day to day missions of World Bank staff in Somalia. 
 
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
A. Economic and Financial Analysis 
 
64. 
The AF Component 1 is expected to contribute to increase in inland revenues in Somalia. More than 25 
years of civil conflict destroyed Somalia’s tax administration system. Governments failed to provide public 
services, and companies and individuals failed to pay taxes. Improvement in inland revenue (individual and 
corporate income tax) generation offers a promising source of home-grown development finance, to contribute 
toward fiscal sustainability and funding for service delivery. In the short term, enabled by creation of a LTO, 
evidence-based policy, administrative and voluntary compliance efforts supported by the project, government-
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 66 
 
led reforms are expected to increase inland revenues from US$2 million (2015) to about US$30 million (2019).13 
Similarly, in the medium term, enabled by the automation of the core business processes, harmonization, and 
taxpayer education and facilitation supported by the project, is expected to increase the inland revenues further 
to about US$170 million (2022). During implementation, drawing on the progress that is made in inland revenue 
collection and improved economic data that is expected to become available, the World Bank will update the 
economic and financial analysis which will inform the assessment of the scope and opportunities to further 
narrow the tax gap.  
 
65. 
The AF Component 2 is expected to contribute to enhanced expenditure management and 
accountability. These enhancements in the PFM system are in turn important enablers of fiscal sustainability, 
and greater efficiency and effectiveness of public spending and government operations. A key focus of the project 
is to support the strengthening of expenditure controls, reporting and oversight, which are fundamental to sound 
PFM. For example, the largest beneficiary from the AF will be the offices of the Accountant General (AG)at the 
FGS, PSS and Somaliland, which are to receive US$6 million.  The treasury management function is strategic in 
strengthening the controls needed to ensure greater fiscal discipline and minimize the accumulation of arrears. 
The move from a manual payroll to a computerized payroll that ensures consistency between the nominal roll 
under the control of the Civil Service Commission and the calculated payroll under the control of the OAG will 
reduce the fiscal burden arising from ghost workers. Similarly, the operationalization of TSA will reduce potential 
cost of borrowing in the long run. The strengthening of the integrity pillar and the planned conduct of audit over 
75 percent of MDAs over the life of the project will ensure effective scrutiny over significant portion of the 
government’s recurrent budget, which in 2017 amounted to US$179 million. Likewise, the support to the SAI 
aligns with the post 2015 development agenda and also helps the better use of resources through improvements 
in the quality of expenditures - all of which provide a critical pathway to increasing the reach of available 
development financing for Somalia with the added potential of ensuring better public service delivery results, 
especially in critical sectors as education, health care, water and sanitation amongst others. 
 
66. 
The WBG is the lead partner to Somalia in its DRM and PFM reforms. The World Bank has strong technical 
expertise and a good record of results in DRM and PFM institutional development in the fragile and conflict 
affected situations, and no other development partner is providing support for inland revenue or the PFM 
institutions in these three governments. The World Bank’s global knowledge will facilitate direct, indirect, and 
induced benefits that will be well beyond the total investment made into the project. The economic and financial 
benefits financed under the AF remains the same as for the ongoing and completed activities. On DRM, the AF 
will have a strong economic rationale due to the rather limited cost of the interventions and the strong potential 
economic benefits even with conservative estimates of benefits without project.  
 
67. 
Rationale for public sector financing. Somalia has achieved significant progress in laying the foundations 
for stability, rebuilding state capacity and institutions, improving security, and rehabilitating physical 
infrastructure. However, these economic, political and institutional gains must have tangible benefits for people 
if the country’s transition is to hold. The project design aims to strengthen core institutions and resource 
management systems that are required to improve public sector efficiency, value for money, and improved 
management of overall fiscal risks. These are core government reforms that are not characterized as bankable 
                                            
 
13 The World Bank Group (2017), Federal Republic of Somalia, Somalia Economic Update, Mobilization Domestic Revenue to 
Rebuild Somalia. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 66 
 
commercial projects and hence private sector financing is not suitable. Therefore, to provide such support there 
is no alternative to public sector financing for strengthening core institutions and building the capacity of 
government agencies to undertake PFM, resource mobilization reforms, and management of public resources to 
deliver basic services. 
 
B. Technical 
 
68. 
The design of the AF is simplified, more focused, consolidated and more flexible, building on lessons 
from the parent project, aiming for better outcomes. To this end, the design has been simplified into three 
substantive components (in addition to reform oversight, coordination and management), namely an enhanced 
focus on revenue to generate inland revenues; a PFM and integrity component consolidated to enhance impact; 
and a JIT component redesigned into an innovative RRF. Also, this design takes on board the lessons-learned 
during the implementation of the ISN and the need to adopt a flexible approach to implementation. It also 
addresses more directly the reality of an incremental and non-linear reform trajectory in which ‘learning-by-
doing’ in a problem-solving iterative manner, with appropriate controls, is a more sustainable approach. 
Furthermore, multi-track and balanced implementation between simultaneous short, medium, and long-term 
reform strategies ensure that short-term results are aligned with the medium to longer term institutional 
development vision. The rationale of the technical design is also based on the following considerations: 
 
a) Value added: A key added value from the World Bank involvement in this project is its application 
of technical expertise in an innovative manner to use country systems as an inroad for strategic 
dialogue on PFM and DRM reforms. Also, hand-holding the project team through capacity building 
during design and implementation has proven to be an invaluable strategy. The parent project was 
catalytic in laying a foundation for longer-term PFM and DRM reforms in Somalia since effectiveness 
in 2015. Finally, the World Bank is ideally placed to use its convening power to crowd-in funds from 
both IDA and through the SMPF for this project to scale up the original activities for the FGS and 
extend support to PSS and Somaliland, while coordinating with other actors operational in southern 
Somalia. 
b) Opportunity: Following a decade of intense conflict during the 1990’s, Somalia has in recent years 
experienced a series of encouraging transitions, laying the foundations for a stable political 
settlement. A security transition, facilitated by the ousting of Al Shabab from key urban areas 
including the capital Mogadishu, opened up political space. Secondly, the 2011 agreement to adopt 
a federal system enshrined in the 2011 Provisional Constitution opened the way for two electoral 
processes that generated momentum and support for the FGS. Thirdly, wide-ranging institutional 
reforms have improved public finances and the regulation of the economy helping to address the 
inequities favored by entrenched vested interests. As a result, many analysts claim the country is 
experiencing a unique opportunity to escape from protracted political crisis.  
c) Strengthened approach: Building on a doubling of federal revenues in the last four years, the World 
Bank will add value by introducing substantial new TA for DRM and PFM reforms. Increasing fiscal 
space - to avoid dependence and to finance essential services - is a key to overcoming the fragility 
trap and a key objective of the project as well as the CPF. The AF will invest in tax policy and 
administration (including systems automation) and tax payer education. In so doing, it will build 
upon the systems experience and expertise developed in the MoF on the successful development 
and implementation of SFMIS.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 66 
 
d) Client demand: The project’s design reflects the request of FGS, PSS and Somaliland, which targets 
the following outcomes: (i) increase in DRM; and (ii) accountability in the use of public funds through 
enhanced institutional strengthening.  
 
e) Flexibility: Global experience from FCV countries indicates that flexibility to make timely 
adjustments to project activities enables smoother implementation and better results. The AF is 
designed to enable flexible responses to relevant government initiatives, as these develop and 
evolve over time. This flexibility would include mobilizing JIT TA within the scope of the project 
components and PDO, changing the sequence of activities, and reallocating funds from slow-moving 
activities to fast-moving ones in line with reform momentum without recourse to reallocation of 
project proceeds or project restructuring as the case may be. 
 
C. Financial Management 
 
69. 
The FM risk rating of the AF is assessed as High. In Somalia, the lack of a unified PFM architecture is 
compounded by constraints recognizable in FCV countries, including limited access to the client, which continues 
to present challenges in provision of effective implementation support. The FM function has the dual role of: (i) 
providing assurance that project resources are used for the intended purposes with due consideration to the 
principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency and accountability; and (ii) development of 
institutional PFM capacities. The FM capacity challenges that are likely to affect the project continue to exist. 
These include an inadequate legal framework and DRM and PFM competencies, risk of circumventing internal 
controls, over reliance on consultants, and absence of a solid local banking system for flow of funds. Exceptional 
funds flow and banking arrangements have been operational since the effectiveness of the current operation in 
July 2015 with no identified ineligible expenditures or leakage of funds under the project. Various risk mitigation 
measures and FM and funds flow arrangements will be further integrated into the AF’s design and fully aligned 
to the country’s PFM systems to further deepen the use of country systems. The AF’s FM arrangements are 
designed to facilitate and promote sustainable development PFM capacities across key government institutions.  
 
70. 
The offices of the Accountant Generals and Offices of the Auditor General for the FGS, Puntland, and 
Somaliland will be central counterparts in the management and oversight of FM arrangements and the 
implementation of risk mitigation measures. In line with SMART fiduciary principles, FM arrangements for the 
project are centralized and managed by special units, the External Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS), headed 
by the EAFS Director and reporting to the AG at FGS, PSS, and Somaliland. The EAFS units are designed to ensure 
harmonization, donor coordination, reduction in duplication, fragmentation, and proliferation of donor-specific 
FM units. To foster sustainability, the EAFS units are staffed with mainstream civil servants supported by targeted 
TA with clear Terms of Reference outlining measures to promote knowledge transfer and an exit strategy. 
Additional in-built sustainability arrangement for the PFM staff professionalization will be annexed as part of the 
EAFS units civil service scheme of service for the PFM job family to create a cohort of competent PFM 
practitioners in government. The PFM Education and Training program continue to gradually build critical mass 
of PFM professionals with a good mix of skills to perform a broad range of PFM tasks. Like other projects 
implemented through country systems, the EAFS using the FMIS will prepare and publish project financial reports 
as part of government-wide fiscal performance reports. Meanwhile, the various Offices of Auditor General, with 
support of a qualified and registered practicing audit TA firm, are responsible for project audits. Given the high 
risks, special reference and attention will be made to International Standards on Auditing (800): Auditor’s Report 
on Special Purpose Audit Engagements. The World Bank will engage with Government to explore contracting 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 66 
 
options to finalize the pending works activities for the MoF building, including contracting through a United 
Nations Agency.  
 
D. Procurement 
 
71. 
Procurement under the AF will be carried out in accordance with the requirements in the Procurement 
Regulations for Borrowers under IPF: Goods, Works, Non-Consulting Services and Consulting Services dated July 
1, 2016 (revised November 2017 and August 2018); “Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and 
Corruption in Projects Financed by International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) Loans and IDA 
Credits and Grants (revised as of July 1, 2016)”; and provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement. Somalia 
being a FCV country, Procurement under the projects will be processed under special procurement arrangements 
referred to in Paragraph 12 of the World Bank Policy IPF dated November 10, 2017. 
 
72. 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) and Procurement Plan (PP): As per the 
requirement of the Regulations, the Recipient has developed a PPSD, based on which the PP for the first 18 
months has also been prepared. The PP sets out the selection methods to be followed by the Recipient during 
project implementation in the procurement of goods, works, non-consulting services. The PP will be updated at 
least every 12 months, or as required, to reflect the actual project implementation needs, but each update shall 
require WBG approval. All PPs will be publicly disclosed in accordance with the WBG disclosure policy. 
 
73. 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP): The WBG’s STEP system will be used to 
prepare, clear, and update PPs and conduct all procurement transactions for the project. Staff of the PIUs have 
already been trained in using STEP. 
 
74. 
The overall procurement assessment risk is Substantial. 
 
E. 
Social (including Safeguards) 
 
75. 
The AF does not trigger any social safeguards policies. The Social impacts of the project are expected to 
be positive, as it will improve the DRM capacity of the government; ensure timely financial reporting; strengthen 
the PFM capability to increase the timely disclosure of overall government revenue collections, improve the link 
between procurement and budget, and henceforth improve procurement efficiency, all leading to greater 
accountability. 
 
F. 
Environment (including Safeguards) 
 
76. 
The environmental category of this project is “B”, with OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment applicable, 
due to the construction completion (Phase 2) of the MoF building in Mogadishu, as referenced in Component 
3. The negative impacts of this construction are expected to be site-specific, reversible and can be readily 
mitigated.  Phase 1 funding, previously provided by the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency 
(Sida) outside the scope of this project, provided for demolition of the previous MoF building on the same 
footprint as well as construction of the structural base and frame of the new building. Impacts are known, as the 
building is currently under construction, and include the following: (i) risk to construction workers, including risks 
of falls; (ii) risk to adjacent properties and their inhabitants; (iii) risks associated with construction debris 
management, including removal and disposal; (iv) construction-related noise, air pollution, and traffic; and (v) 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 66 
 
increased demand for water and wastewater services, both during construction and operation. Phase 2 of the 
construction will be completed by an engineering firm with both worker health and safety and environmental 
management covenants consistent with World Bank safeguard standards. 
 
77. 
Climate change and disaster screening has been conducted for this AF. Although the Somalia country 
profile is highly susceptible both to near-term climate-induced disasters as well as long-term climate change 
impacts, this project does not have any activities with exposure to climate risks, not does it have any activities 
which mitigate climate risks. 
 
78. 
Safeguards requirements have been deferred, as provided for under Paragraph 12(a) of the IPF World 
Bank Policy, as the project being prepared under condensed procedures. A Terms of Reference for an 
Environmental Audit of Phase 1 and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for Phase 2 has been prepared 
during project appraisal. The Phase 2 EMP, to include and build upon the Phase 1 Audit, will be prepared, 
reviewed, cleared, and disclosed both in the World Bank external website as well as in-country prior to 
disbursement of funds related to construction completion. The EMP will provide provisions for supervision of 
and reporting on construction contractor compliance with World Bank environmental and social safeguards 
policies.  Other than construction completion of the MoF building, there are currently no other identified 
environmental impacts associated with the DRM & PFM AF.  If the RRF proceeds to finance another activity where 
environmental and/or social safeguards policies are applicable, relevant safeguards documentation specific to 
that activity must be prepared, disclosed, and implemented. 
 
V. WORLD BANK GROUP GRIEVANCE REDRESS 
 
79. 
Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a WBG supported project 
may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the WB’s Grievance Redress 
Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address project-
related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the WB’s 
independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of WB non-
compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been 
brought directly to the WBG’s attention, and Management has been given an opportunity to respond.  For 
information on how to submit complaints to the WBG’s corporate Grievance Redress Service (GRS), please visit 
http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-service. 
For 
information on how to submit complaints to the WBG Inspection Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 66 
 
      
 
VI. SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES 
 
 
Changed 
Not Changed 
Project's Development Objectives 
  ✔ 
   
Results Framework 
  ✔ 
   
Components and Cost 
  ✔ 
   
Loan Closing Date(s) 
  ✔ 
   
Reallocation between Disbursement Categories 
  ✔ 
   
EA category 
  ✔ 
   
Procurement 
  ✔ 
   
Implementing Agency 
     
✔ 
Cancellations Proposed 
     
✔ 
Disbursements Arrangements 
     
✔ 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
     
✔ 
Legal Covenants 
     
✔ 
Institutional Arrangements 
     
✔ 
Financial Management 
     
✔ 
APA Reliance 
     
✔ 
Other Change(s) 
     
✔ 
 
 
VII. DETAILED CHANGE(S) 
  
PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE 
Current PDO 
The Project Development Objective is to establish and strengthen institutional capacity for the management of 
public funds inCentral Finance Agencies and targeted sectors. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 66 
 
Proposed New PDO 
To strengthen systems of domestic revenue mobilization, expenditure control and accountability in the Federal 
Government, Puntland State of Somalia, and Somaliland. 
 
  
COMPONENTS 
Current Component Name 
Current Cost 
(US$, millions) 
Action 
Proposed Component 
Name 
Proposed Cost (US$, 
millions) 
Component 1: Revenue 
mobilization, planning and 
budget preparation 
2.75 Marked for 
Deletion 
 
0.00 
Component 2: Treasury 
management, budget 
execution, procurement, 
accounting and financial 
reporting 
9.88 Marked for 
Deletion 
 
0.00 
Component 3: 
Strengthening the integrity 
pillars 
1.95 Marked for 
Deletion 
 
0.00 
Component 4: Public 
financial management 
professionalization 
1.00 Marked for 
Deletion 
 
0.00 
Component 5: Public 
financial management 
reform oversight, 
coordination and 
management 
2.93 Revised 
Component 4: Public 
financial management 
reform oversight, 
coordination and 
management 
3.00 
Component 6:  Demand-
driven Just-in-Time support 
(JIT) (Bank Executed) 
1.00 Marked for 
Deletion 
 
0.00 
Unallocated 
0.50 Marked for 
Deletion 
 
0.00 
 
0.00 New 
Component 1:   
Strengthening Tax Policy 
and Inland Revenue 
Administration Systems 
12.30 
 
0.00 New 
Component 2: 
Strengthening Capacity 
for Public Financial 
Management Control 
and Accountability 
12.70 
 
0.00 New 
Component 3: Rapid 
Response Facility 
2.00 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 66 
 
TOTAL 
  20.01  
 
  30.00 
 
 
LOAN CLOSING DATE(S) 
Ln/Cr/Tf 
Status 
Original Closing 
 
Current 
Closing(s)  
 
Proposed  
Closing  
 
Proposed Deadline 
for Withdrawal 
Applications 
TF-A0388 
Effective 
30-Jun-2018 
30-Jun-2020 
30-Jun-2022 
30-Oct-2022 
TF-A0389 
Effective 
30-Jun-2018 
30-Jun-2020 
30-Jun-2022 
30-Oct-2022 
   
REALLOCATION BETWEEN DISBURSEMENT CATEGORIES 
Current Allocation 
Actuals + Committed 
Proposed Allocation 
Financing % 
(Type Total) 
 
 
 
Current 
Proposed 
 REALLOCATION NEW 
 
TF-A0388-001    |    Currency: USD 
 
iLap Category Sequence No: 1 
Current Expenditure Category: Gds,Wks,NonCS,CS,Trg&OCPts1A-5A 
10,000,000.00 
9,368,249.13 
10,000,000.00 
100.00 
100.00 
 
iLap Category Sequence No: 2 
Current Expenditure Category: Gds,Wks,NonCS,CS,Trg&OCPts1B-5B 
6,000,000.00 
3,208,524.10 
6,000,000.00 
100.00 
100.00 
 
Total 
16,000,000.00
12,576,773.23 
16,000,000.00 
 
 
 
TF-A0389-001    |    Currency: USD 
 
iLap Category Sequence No: 1 
Current Expenditure Category: Gds(incl vehcl),NonCS,CS,Trg&OC 
4,000,000.00 
1,638,387.04 
4,000,000.00 
100.00 
100.00 
Total 
4,000,000.00
1,638,387.04 
4,000,000.00 
 
 
 
 Expected Disbursements (in US$) 
 DISBURSTBL 
Fiscal Year 
Annual 
Cumulative 
2016 
1,030,040.00 
1,030,040.00 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 of 66 
 
2017 
2,550,180.00 
3,580,220.00 
2018 
3,983,380.00 
7,563,600.00 
2019 
8,136,400.00 
15,700,000.00 
2020 
7,000,000.00 
22,700,000.00 
2021 
8,000,000.00 
30,700,000.00 
2022 
10,000,000.00 
40,700,000.00 
2023 
9,300,000.00 
50,000,000.00 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
Risk Category 
Latest ISR Rating 
Current Rating 
 
Political and Governance 
z Substantial 
z High 
 
Macroeconomic 
z High 
z High 
 
Sector Strategies and Policies 
z Moderate 
z Moderate 
 
Technical Design of Project or Program 
z Substantial 
z Substantial 
 
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and 
Sustainability 
z Substantial 
z Substantial 
 
Fiduciary 
z Substantial 
z High 
 
Environment and Social 
z Low 
z Moderate 
 
Stakeholders 
z Substantial 
z Substantial 
 
Other 
z High 
z High 
 
Overall 
z Substantial 
z High 
 
  
Environmental Assessment (EA) Category 
 
Change of EA Category 
Original EA Category 
Yes 
Not Required (C) 
Current EA Category 
Proposed EA Category 
Not Required (C) 
Partial Assessment (B) 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 of 66 
 
LEGAL COVENANTS2 
LEGAL COVENANTS – Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening 
Project (P166206) 
Sections and Description 
 
 
Schedule 2 Section I Part D.1: The Recipient shall, not later than December 31 of each year prepare and furnish to 
the Association, a consolidated annual program of activities proposed for implementation under the Project during 
the following Fiscal Year, together with a proposed budget for the purpose. 
 
Schedule 2 Section I Part D.2: The Recipient shall, in respect of Part 1.B.5 of Project cause the Puntland State of 
Somalia to submit the identified priority activities for implementation during the following Fiscal Year as part of the 
annual work program. 
 
Schedule 2 Section I Part E.1(a): The Recipient shall prepare, in accordance with terms of reference acceptable to 
the Association, an Environmental Management Plan, including an Environmental Audit. 
 
Schedule 2 Section I Part E.1(b): The Recipient shall adopt the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) 
Environmental Audit (EA) as shall have been approved by the Association and publish said EMP and EA, in a manner 
acceptable to the Association. 
 
Schedule 2 Section I.C.1: The Recipient shall not later than thirty (30) days after the Signature Date, update the 
Project Implementation Manual, in form and substance satisfactory to the World Bank, and thereafter. 
 
Schedule 2 Section I B1: The Recipient shall: not later than thirty (30) days after the Signature Date, update the 
Project Implementation Manual, in form and substance satisfactory to the World Bank. 
 
 
 
Conditions 
 
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
The SMPF Grant Agreement has been executed and delivered and all conditions 
precedent to its effectiveness or to the right of the Recipient to make 
withdrawals under it (other than the effectiveness of this Agreement) have been 
fulfilled (FA with FRS Article V, 5.01, (a). 
 
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
The Subsidiary Agreement has been executed and delivered on behalf of the 
Recipient and Puntland State of Somalia, and said Subsidiary Agreement is legally 
binding upon the Recipient and Puntland State of Somalia, in accordance with its 
terms (FA with FRS Article V, 5.01, (b). 
 
Type 
Description 
Disbursement 
No withdrawal shall be made for payments for works in respect of construction 
of the second phase of the Federal Ministry of Finance headquarters building 
under Category (3) set forth in the table under Section IV.1. of this Schedule, 
unless the Recipient has prepared, adopted and disclosed the Environmental 
Management Plan and the Environmental Audit, in form and substance 
satisfactory to the Association (FA with FRS Schedule 2, Section III,B,(b)). 
 
Type 
Description 
Disbursement 
No withdrawal shall be made for payments under Categories (1), (2) and (3) in 
respect of any Rapid Response Facility activity under Parts 3.A.1, 3.A.2 and 3.B.1 
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) – 
Additional Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 of 66 
 
of the Project, unless the Recipient has, in form and substance satisfactory to the 
Association, met the respective criteria established in the Project 
Implementation Manual (FA with FRS Schedule 2, Section III,B,( c); and SMPF 
Grant Agreement with FRS Schedule 2, Section IV,B,1, (b). 
 
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
The Financing Agreement has been executed and delivered and all conditions 
precedent to its effectiveness or to the right of the Recipient to make 
withdrawals under it (other than the effectiveness of this Agreement) have been 
fulfilled (SMPF Grant Agreement with FRS Article V, 5.01,(a)). 
 
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
The Subsidiary Agreement has been executed and delivered on behalf of the 
Recipient and Puntland State of Somalia, and said Subsidiary Agreement is legally 
binding upon the Recipient and Puntland State of Somalia, in accordance with its 
terms (SMPF Grant Agreement with FRS Article V, 5.01,(b)). 
 
Type 
Description 
Disbursement 
Payments under Category (2) in respect of any Rapid Response Faility activity 
under Part 3 of the Project, unless the Recipient has, in form and substance 
satisfactory to the World Bank, met the respective criteria established in the 
Project Implementation Manual (SMPF Grant Agreement with Somaliland 
Schedule 2, Section IV, B, 1, (b)). 
 
 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (P166206) 
 
 
 
 
Page 38 of 66 
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING 
 
      
 
Results Framework 
COUNTRY: Somalia  
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project 
Project Development Objective(s) 
 
T