Document of 
The World Bank 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD2964  
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT PAPER 
ON A 
PROPOSED ADDITIONAL GRANT 
FROM THE SOMALIA MULTI PARTNER TRUST FUND 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$3 MILLION 
 
TO THE  
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
 
FOR A 
SOMALI URBAN INVESTMENT PLANNING PROJECT ADDITIONAL FINANCING  
 
November 27, 2018 
 
 
 
 
Social, Urban, Rural And Resilience Global Practice 
Africa Region 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective October 31, 2018) 
 
Currency Unit  =   Somali Shiling 
SSH 580 = US$1 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Hafez Ghanem 
Country Director: Bella Bird 
Senior Global Practice Director: Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez 
Practice Manager: Meskerem Brhane 
Task Team Leaders: Makiko Watanabe, Zishan Karim 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
AFS 
ARAP 
BRA 
COPM 
CPF 
Annual Financial Statements 
Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan 
Benadir Regional Administration 
Comprehensive Operating Procedure Manual 
Country Partnership Framework 
DA 
Designated Account 
EAFS 
E&S 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
Environment and Social 
ESIA 
Environment and Social Impact Assessment 
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
ESMP 
Environment and Social Management Plan 
FCV 
FGS 
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FM 
FMIS 
FMS 
GBV 
GRM 
Financial Management 
Financial Management Information System 
Federal Member State 
Gender-Based Violence 
Grievance Redress and Feedback Mechanism 
IDPs 
Internally Displaced Persons 
IFR 
Interim Unaudited Financial Report 
IPSAS 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards 
ISA 
International Standards on Auditing 
ISP 
Implementation Support Plan  
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MPF 
Multi-Partner Fund 
O&M 
Operations and Maintenance 
OP 
Operations Policy 
PA 
Project Account 
PAD 
Project Appraisal Document 
PAP 
PDO 
Project Affected Persons 
Project Development Objective 
PFM 
PIM 
Public Financial Management 
Project Implementation Manual 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PP 
Procurement Plan 
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development 
RAP 
RPF 
Resettlement Action Plan 
Resettlement Policy Framework 
SCoA 
SFMIS 
Standard Chart of Accounts 
Somali Financial Management Information System 
SoE 
Statement of Expenditures 
SOP 
SORT 
Series of Projects 
Systematic Operations Risk Rating Tool 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
SUIPP 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project  
SURP 
Somali Urban Resilience Project 
 
 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
UCS 
UNOPS 
WBG 
Use of Country Systems 
United Nations Office for Project Services 
World Bank Group 
 
 
 
 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 1 of 38 
 
    
1.   
 
BASIC INFORMATION – PARENT (Somali Urban Investment Planning - P150374) 
 
 
Country 
Product Line 
Team Leader(s) 
Somalia 
Recipient Executed 
Activities 
Zishan Faiza Karim 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Resp CC 
Req CC 
Practice Area (Lead) 
P150374 
Investment Project 
Financing 
GSU13 (9348) 
AFCE1 (6541) 
Social, Urban, Rural and 
Resilience Global Practice 
 
Implementing Agency: Hargeisa Municipality, Mogadishu Municipality, Garowe Municipality, Baidoa Municipality, 
Kismayo Municipality 
 ADD FIN TBL1 
Is this a regionally tagged 
project? 
 
No 
 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
 
No 
 
Approval Date 
Closing Date 
 
Original Environmental 
Assessment Category 
Current EA Category 
04-Feb-2016 
 
Partial Assessment (B) 
Partial Assessment 
(B) 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Parent 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach [MPA] 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[  ] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 2 of 38 
 
Development Objective(s) 
 
To provide (i) an assessment of the feasibility of, and preliminary plans for, selected urban investment and 
institutional strengthening activities in southern Somalia, Puntland and Somaliland, and (ii) enhanced project 
preparation and implementation capacity of participating agencies.  
 
Ratings (from Parent ISR) 
 
RATING_DRAFT_NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation 
Latest ISR 
 
17-May-2016 
23-Mar-2017 
06-Nov-2017 
13-Jun-2018 
Progress towards 
achievement of PDO 
S 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
Overall Implementation 
Progress (IP) 
S 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Overall Safeguards 
Rating 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Overall Risk 
H 
 
H 
 
H 
 
H 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing 
- P166591) 
 
ADDFIN_TABLE 
Project ID 
Project Name 
Additional Financing Type 
Urgent Need or Capacity 
Constraints 
P166591 
Somali Urban Investment 
Planning Project Additional 
Financing 
Scale Up 
Yes 
Financing instrument 
Product line 
Approval Date 
Investment Project 
Financing 
Recipient Executed 
Activities 
30-Nov-2018 
Projected Date of Full 
Disbursement 
Bank/IFC Collaboration   
 
 
30-Apr-2022 
No 
 
 
Is this a regionally tagged project? 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 3 of 38 
 
No 
 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Child 
 
 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[  ] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
 
 Disbursement Summary (from Parent ISR) 
 
Source of Funds 
Net  
Commitments 
Total Disbursed 
Remaining Balance 
Disbursed 
Grants 
 
 
 
  
 
 % 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional 
Financing - P166591) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
SUMMARY (Total Financing) 
 
Current Financing 
Proposed Additional 
Financing 
Total Proposed 
Financing 
Total Project Cost 
6.00 
3.00 
9.00 
Total Financing 
6.00 
3.00 
9.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILSNewFinEnh1- Additional Financing 
Non-World Bank Group Financing 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 4 of 38 
 
     Trust Funds 
3.00 
          Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
3.00 
 
   
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
Does the project require any other Policy waiver(s)? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice 
 
Contributing Practice Areas 
 
 
 
Gender Tag 
 
Does the project plan to undertake any of the following? 
 
a. Analysis to identify Project-relevant gaps between males and females, especially in light of country gaps identified 
through SCD and CPF 
 
No 
 
b. Specific action(s) to address the gender gaps identified in (a) and/or to improve women or men's empowerment 
 
No 
 
c. Include Indicators in results framework to monitor outcomes from actions identified in (b) 
 
No 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 5 of 38 
 
PROJECT TEAM 
 
Bank Staff 
Name 
Role 
Specialization 
Unit 
Makiko Watanabe 
Team Leader (ADM 
Responsible) 
 
GSU13 
Zishan Faiza Karim 
Team Leader 
 
GSU13 
Francis Akolu Muthuiya 
Procurement Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Procurement 
GGOPA 
Anjani Kumar 
Procurement Specialist 
Procurement 
GGOPA 
Leonard Mutuku Matheka 
Financial Management 
Specialist (ADM Responsible) 
Financial Management 
GGOAE 
Tracy Hart 
Environmental Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Environmental Safeguards 
GEN01 
Bernard Harborne 
Team Member 
Advisor (FCV) 
GSUGL 
Dahir Elmi Warsame 
Team Member 
Consultant 
GSU13 
Dean A. Cira 
Team Member 
Advisor (Urban) 
GSU09 
Edith Ruguru Mwenda 
Counsel 
Legal 
LEGAM 
George Ferreira Da Silva 
Team Member 
Finance Officer 
WFACS 
Harub Ahmed Harub 
Social Specialist 
Social Safeguards 
GSU07 
Janerose Muboka Lubisia 
Team Member 
Member 
AFMSO 
Knut Opsal 
Safeguards Advisor/ESSA 
 
GSU07 
Salome Awuor Aganda 
Team Member 
 
AFMSO 
Samuel Ngethe Mbachia 
Team Member 
Engineer 
GSU13 
Sheila Lucrecia Francisco 
Pene Neves 
Team Member 
Disbursement 
WFACS 
Verena Phipps-Ebeler 
Social Specialist 
Social Safeguards 
GSU07 
 
Extended Team 
Name 
Title 
Organization 
Location 
Desta Solomon 
Consultant 
World Bank 
 
 
2.   
 
3.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
November 19, 2018 
Page 6 of 38 
 
 
SOMALIA 
 
SOMALI URBAN INVESTMENT PLANNING PROJECT ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
   
I. 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING ........................................ 7 
II. 
COUNTRY AND SECTOR CONTEXT ................................................................................. 10 
III. DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING .................................................................... 12 
IV. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 18 
V. APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................................. 20 
VI. WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS .............................................................................. 27 
VII. SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES ................................... ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED. 
VIII. DETAILED CHANGE(S) ................................................... ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED. 
IX. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ..................................................................... 35 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 7 of 38 
 
 
I. 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
1. 
This Project Paper seeks the approval of an additional financing of US$3 million to the Somali 
Urban Investment Planning Project (P150374). The original project, referred to as SUIPP or the “parent 
project” has been under implementation since February 24, 2016, with a budget of US$6 million from the 
Somali Multi-Partner Fund (MPF). The current closing date is December 31, 2018.  
 
2. 
The parent project aimed to provide: (i) an assessment of the feasibility of, and preliminary 
plans for, selected urban investment and institutional strengthening activities in southern Somalia, 
Puntland and Somaliland, and (ii) enhanced project preparation and implementation capacity of 
participating agencies. The SUIPP financed feasibility studies and engineering designs for prioritized urban 
investments in the three cities of Mogadishu, Hargeisa, and Garowe as well as institutional assessments 
for the municipalities of Mogadishu, Garowe and Hargeisa as well as the federal Ministry of Public Works 
and Hargeisa Water Agency.  The SUIPP also set up Project Implementation Units (PIUs) and built the 
capacity of PIU staff in fiduciary, safeguards, project management, and monitoring and evaluation.  
 
3. 
The main objective of the SUIPP is to lay the groundwork for a follow-on investment project- 
the Somali Urban Resilience Project (SURP) (P163857). SUIPP helps develop the institutional platform 
and technical studies for priority investments to be financed under the follow-on project. SURP is a 
national project with the aim of piloting the use of Somalia’s Public Financial Management (PFM) systems 
at the sub-national level and strengthening municipal government capacity. The SURP takes a 
programmatic or Series of Projects (SOP) approach, scaling up its geographical and sectoral coverage as 
additional funding becomes available. The first phase of SURP (SOP1) will finance investments in 
Mogadishu and Garowe. 
 
4. 
The overall implementation progress of the parent SUIPP is rated as Satisfactory and the Project 
Development Objective remains achievable. In Mogadishu, the SUIPP undertook feasibility studies and 
preliminary engineering designs for 4 primary urban roads (17km in length) and 31 secondary roads across 
17 districts, which were prioritized in a participatory manner, totaling an investment of US$33 million. In 
Garowe, feasibility studies and preliminary engineering designs were prepared for 18 km of secondary 
roads and 2 bridges totaling investments of US$17 million. In Hargeisa, feasibility studies and preliminary 
engineering designs were prepared for sanitary landfill solid waste management facility and anaerobic 
pond liquid waste management system with an estimated cost of US$14 million. Institutional assessments 
were undertaken for Mogadishu, Garowe and Hargeisa Municipalities as well as Ministry of Public Works 
and the Hargeisa Water Agency. Finally, PIUs were set up and trained in all three cities.  There were no 
legal covenants in the parent project.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 8 of 38 
 
Table 1: Original SUIPP Cost Table 
Project Components 
Project 
Cost 
Available 
balance 
Execution 
Component 1: Mogadishu 
1.73 
0.0 
 
Primary Roads FS and PED 
0.43 
 
Bank 
Secondary roads FS 
0.29 
 
Bank 
BRA and MoPW Institutional 
Assessment 
0.21 
 
Bank 
Project Prep/TA 
0.80 
 
BRA 
Component 2: Garowe 
0.98 
0.0 
 
Intra-city roads FS and PED 
0.23 
 
Bank 
GM institutional assessment 
0.10 
 
Bank 
Project prep/TA 
0.65 
 
Garowe 
Municipality 
Component 3: Hargeisa 
1.03 
0.0 
 
Waste management FS and 
PED 
0.21 
 
Bank 
HM/HWA institutional 
assessment 
0.12 
 
Bank 
Project Prep/TA 
0.70 
 
Hargeisa 
Municipality 
Component 4: Crosscutting 
activities 
1.83 
0.0 
 
LDF Assessment 
0.17 
 
Bank 
Conflict assessment 
0.20 
 
Bank 
Impact assessment 
0.20 
 
Bank 
Audit 
0.40 
 
Bank 
Operational enhancements 
0.86 
 
Bank 
Total Baseline costs 
5.57 
 
 
Contingencies 
0.43 
0.38 
 
Total Project Costs 
6.00 
0.38 
 
 
 
5. 
The SUIPP has made good disbursement progress with US$3.47 million disbursed from the TFs 
executed by the Bank on Behalf of the Recipient and US$2.15 million fully disbursed from the Recipient 
executed TF1.  The balance of US$380,000 is expected to be fully disbursed by end December 20182. Some 
cross-cutting activities envisaged in the parent SUIPP such as the conflict and impact assessment were not 
undertaken, and the budget allocated for mitigating against any potential operational risks was not 
needed. These cost savings were allocated for undertaking (i) a rapid urban assessment in Kismayo and 
                                            
1 These disbursement figures are currently not reflected in the datasheet due to a technical issue with the project portal of the 
parent project. This is being resolved with the Information Technology team.  
2 This balance of US$380,000 is expected to contribute to the Trunk Drainage Masterplan and Road Network Assessment in 
Mogadishu.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 9 of 38 
 
Baidoa to lay the groundwork for the proposed SUIPP Additional Financing as well as a (ii) Trunk Drainage 
Masterplan and Road Connectivity Assessment for Mogadishu. The Trunk Drainage Masterplan will map 
out existing trunk drainage systems and identify gaps in their connectivity and develop topography specific 
designs which can help mitigate unplanned expansion of the drainage system, frequent localized flooding, 
and road shoulder erosion. This master plan will enable the Mogadishu Municipality to develop 
Mogadishu city in a more planned and coordinated manner and both the master plan and road 
connectivity assessment will provide the municipality with an important tool to maximize limited 
resources and mobilize donor financing for roads and drainage works. 
 
6. 
The SUIPP has made important achievements by laying the foundation for the delivery of 
infrastructure investments through municipalities for the first time in Somalia. A subset of the prioritized 
investments studied under SUIPP will be financed by the first phase of the follow-on SURP (SOP1), which 
is effective as of October 19, 2018. Specifically, the SURP first phase will finance 19 secondary roads across 
7 districts in Mogadishu totaling 7.5 km and 4 secondary roads in Garowe totaling 4.4km.3  PIUs, which 
were established within respective municipal governments, will implement these capital investment 
projects. By demonstrating the effectiveness of local government systems in implementing donor-funded 
projects, the Government hopes to leverage additional resources in the future.  
 
7. 
Given the paramount needs on the ground and the centrality of cities to Somalia’s stability and 
sustainable growth, there is a strong rationale to scale-up SUIPP and the follow on SURP to additional 
cities. Somalia is a highly urbanized country with 42 percent of the total population residing in urban areas 
and growing at a rate of around 4 percent per annum.4 If the current trend continues, its urban population 
will nearly double by 2030. Rapid urbanization is exacerbated by decades of violent conflict and political 
instability and compounded by cyclical environmental adversities such as drought and flooding. An 
estimated 2.6 million Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in Somalia reside in cities, with Mogadishu, 
Baidoa, and Kismayo alone hosting almost 40 percent of the total drought-related displacements.5 Somali 
cities, however, have not been able to keep pace with the rapid urbanization. An accelerated urban 
population growth, high unemployment rate especially among the youth, income inequality, lack of access 
to basic services, and lack of Government’s ability to address the people’s needs are all contributing to 
increased fragility of the cities in Somalia. 
 
8. 
 In light of the immense needs in Kismayo and Baidoa, the German government has contributed 
additional funding for the SUIPP and SURP through the MPF for strengthening municipal capacity and 
addressing urban infrastructure needs. The German contribution will support the scale up of the SUIPP 
through this proposed additional financing to the two additional cities of Kismayo and Baidoa. These two 
cities are strategically important secondary cities that contribute to Somalia’s stability and sustainable 
growth but are struggling to meet the increased demands for services with a large influx of IDPs.  
 
 
 
                                            
3 The Hargeisa feasibility study focused solely on a solid and liquid waste management facility which would require a substantial 
investment of US$16 million and will not be financed due to budget limitations. 
4 UNFPA (2014) 
5 Humanitarian Bulletin, July 2017, UNOCHA 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 10 of 38 
 
9. 
Scaling up the SUIPP and the follow on SURP provides an opportunity for local governments to 
strengthen their capacity and deliver tangible benefits to their citizens in key Somali cities. The SUIPP 
parent project has helped build local government capacities in planning, budgeting, financial 
management, and procurement. Capacity building coupled with a capital investment budget channeled 
through the Government PFM systems can greatly improve the municipalities’ ability to manage public 
funds more transparently and with more accountability. In the current state building process, these are 
important components for building citizen confidence in emerging institutions by delivering tangible and 
visible peace dividends. The proposed AF will help build these capacities in the two key secondary cities 
of Kismayo and Baidoa in Somalia.  
 
10. 
The SUIPP AF builds on the findings of an urban assessment undertaken for Kismayo and Baidoa 
as well as other work carried out by other development partners. The urban assessment identified key 
urban infrastructure needs in both cities and recommended ‘quick wins’ or infrastructure/services and 
shelter provisions that can be prioritized for implementation under the SUIPP and SURP second phase 
(SOP2). This assessment also provided an overview of the key social and land issues to be considered in 
implementation of urban infrastructure investments in Kismayo and Baidoa. The AF also builds on UN-
Habitat’s ongoing work on urban planning and strategic spatial planning in Kismayo and Baidoa which 
provides important city level information on existing land use, housing, IDPs, infrastructure and service 
delivery; as well as an urban plan that points to the future direction of city growth; and 
infrastructure/service requirements.  Finally, the participatory decision-making structures established 
under the IOM-UN-Habitat-UNDP’s Midnimo6 project in Kismayo and Baidoa can be used for community 
consultations under the SUIPP AF. These community structures are spearheaded by the district 
government and represents different population groups including women, youth and IDPs. The World 
Bank will help institutionalize other development partners’ outputs – such as the spatial plans and the 
participatory planning system - by leveraging on the Bank’s comparative advantage of working through 
the Government. That is, the Bank will facilitate the adoption of these plans and mechanisms by the 
Government.  
 
11. 
This proposal includes a restructuring of the original project to: (i) expand the geographical 
coverage; (ii) extend the project closing date until December 31, 2021; (iii) restructure the project 
components; and (iv) revise the indicators and targets in the Results Framework. The Project Development 
Objective (PDO) is also being adjusted.   
 
12. 
The proposed AF is being processed under procedures specified under Bank Policy Investment 
Project Financing dated November 10, 2017, Paragraph 12 and 13 for situations of urgent need of 
assistance. The use of this policy is justified as Somalia meets both relevant eligibility criteria with an 
urgent need of assistance because of a natural disaster as well as conflict and severe capacity constraints 
because of fragility.  
 
II. 
COUNTRY AND SECTOR CONTEXT 
 
13. 
Somalia is emerging from a legacy of two and half decades of cycles of violent conflict and 
fragility. Since 1991, the country has been fragmented by armed conflict, ad hoc regime changes and 
                                            
6 “Midnimo” means “unity” in Somali language.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 11 of 38 
 
state capture. The August 2012 peaceful transfer of power from a transitional to a full federal 
government and the peaceful handover of power in 2017 to the current President generated domestic 
political momentum and triggered international recognition and support for the new federal 
government. Over the last four years, Somalia has taken encouraging steps towards a political settlement 
and the rehabilitation of government institutions.  
 
14. 
However, decades of conflict compounded by recurring natural disasters have displaced a 
significant part of the society and damaged much of the country’s infrastructure, resulting in high rates 
of poverty and food insecurity. Of the 12.3 million Somali population,7 2.4 million are likely to live on the 
margins of food insecurity.8 Poverty is estimated at approximately 69 percent at the national level while 
overall urban poverty rate stands at 64 percent. Poverty is heavily concentrated among IDPs estimated at 
76 percent.  
 
15. 
Somalia’s urban population is growing rapidly partly as a result of significant forced migration 
into urban areas caused by protracted conflicts, insecurity, and cyclical natural disasters. The influx of 
the displaced is concentrated in Mogadishu, Kismayo, and Baidoa. As of July 2018, there are an 
estimated 2.6 million IDPs in Somalia, many of whom reside in urban areas.9 The country has also 
witnessed a steady flow of returnees and refugees from neighboring countries. Returnees and IDPs are 
settling in urban areas in the hope of better access to humanitarian assistance, safety, services and job 
opportunities. The influx of IDPs and returnees has been concentrated in certain cities, namely 
Mogadishu, Kismayo and Baidoa. In Mogadishu, area occupied by IDP settlements increased by 16 percent 
between 2013 and 2017. In Kismayo, the IDP-occupied area increased over seven-fold, and in Baidoa, it 
has more than tripled.10 Current urban population is estimated at around 5.2 million people (42 percent) 
with a growth rate of around 4 percent per annum.11 If the current trend continues, by 2030, Somalia will 
add another 4.5 million urban residents to its already constrained urban environment, nearly doubling 
current numbers.12 
 
16. 
If managed well, urbanization can contribute to stability in Somalia. With a greater 
concentration of people, capital, and assets, cities are better equipped to provide anonymity to those 
fleeing from conflict and offer better access to security, services, and jobs than rural areas. Somali cities 
are growing rapidly as they serve as a safe haven for people who seek refuge. 
 
17. 
Yet, as urban areas fail to keep pace with the rapid urbanization, Somali cities are becoming 
more fragile. In the absence of security of land tenure, IDPs are highly vulnerable to forced eviction. For 
example, over 109,000 IDPs living in informal settlements across the country have been forcefully evicted 
between January and August 2017.13 Due to forced eviction, many IDPs have shifted to the outskirts of 
cities, causing uncontrolled urban sprawl. The area occupied by IDP settlements in the fringes of Baidoa 
has increased by 177 percent in 2017. The number of IDPs in Kismayo tripled in 2017, and most of them 
                                            
7 UNFPA (2014) http://somalia.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/Population-Estimation-Survey-of-Somalia-PESS-2013-
2014.pdf 
8 FEWSNET – Somalia Food Security Outlook for October 2017 to May 2018. 
9 UNOCHA Humanitarian Bulletin Somalia 2 June – 5 July 2018. 
10 UN-Habitat calculation (2017). 
11 UNFPA (2014). 
12 World Bank staff calculation based on UN-Habitat and CIA World Factbook.  
13 Norwegian Refugee Council (2017).  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 12 of 38 
 
have settled outside of the city.14 Such spatial sprawl makes service provision difficult and costly as new 
settlements are disconnected from the existing urban centers and infrastructure networks. Spatial 
fragmentation also inhibits IDPs’ access to jobs and prevents cities from reaping the scale and 
agglomeration benefits. As a result, Somali cities are expanding in a haphazard manner, slums are 
growing, and unemployment especially among the youth is increasing. Large influxes of people are also 
disrupting the social cohesion and protection challenges are significant in the context of ongoing 
urbanization and displacement. Gender-based violence (GBV), among other protection concerns, is a 
prevalent issue in Somalia and a significant challenge confronting displaced populations in particular15. 
Indeed, Mogadishu, Merca and Kismayo are considered the three most fragile cities in the world.16 Urban 
fragility, particularly in key cities which include Mogadishu, Kismayo, and Baidoa, can have a profound 
impact on Somalia’s nascent stability. 
 
18. 
The Government has limited capacity and resources to address the challenges urbanization in 
Somalia brings. District governments (which function as municipal governments) have the primary 
responsibility for providing land, housing and basic services. But capacity and fiscal constraints often limit 
their ability to undertake basic municipal functions, and outside of a few larger cities, these constraints 
deepen rapidly. Sub-national governments are only receiving a small recurrent budget through an inter-
governmental fiscal transfer, and staffing is generally skeletal with limited capacity. Municipal 
governments’ own source revenue collection is minimal and unstructured. They are dependent on 
external assistance or private sector for capital investments and delivery of services which tends to be ad 
hoc due to lack of comprehensive urban development plans and limited resources.  
 
III. 
DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
A. Project Development Objective 
19. 
The original project objective is being amended to remove the mention of any specific geographic 
areas to enable the SUIPP to be scaled up to key Somali cities as funding becomes available. It is also being 
streamlined to make it more succinct. The original PDO was to provide: (i) an assessment of the feasibility 
of, and preliminary plans for, selected urban investment and institutional strengthening activities in 
southern Somalia, Puntland and Somaliland; and (ii) enhanced project preparation and implementation 
capacity of participating agencies.  The revised objective would be to provide: (i) an assessment of the 
feasibility of, and preliminary plans for, selected urban investment and institutional strengthening 
activities in targeted areas, and (ii) enhanced project preparation and implementation capacity of 
participating agencies.  
 
B.  Project Components 
20. 
The proposed AF will scale-up SUIPP activities to the cities of Kismayo and Baidoa with an 
additional financing of US$3 million. Overall, the SUIPP AF will finance the same activities as in the parent 
project, mainly: 
 
                                            
14 Somalia Drought Impact Needs Assessment (2017). Urban chapter.  
15 Several studies estimate that roughly three-quarters of survivors are IDPs. 
16 “These are the World’s Most Fragile Cities”. Urban Gateway. http://new.unhabitat.org/news/these-are-worlds-most-fragile-
cities. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 13 of 38 
 
a) Establishment of Project Implementation Units (PIUs) in target cities and provision of technical 
assistance to enhance the capacity of the Somali executing agencies to plan, prepare and 
implement urban development projects, such as SURP, effectively and efficiently while mitigating 
fiduciary and safeguards risks. These activities will be client executed.  
 
b) Technical studies and designs of the priority urban investments and institutional assessments of 
the implementing agencies in target cities. The selection of the priority investments will be based 
on the rapid urban assessment which was undertaken in Kismayo and Baidoa under SUIPP original 
financing, but also on pre-agreed selection criteria and a multi-stakeholder participatory selection 
process. The priority urban investments that will be studied under SUIPP AF will be financed under 
SURP, the follow-on investment project. The institutional assessments will provide an 
informational and analytic base for the preparation of institutional strengthening activities to be 
supported under SURP. Other thematic analytics may also be undertaken as needs emerge. In 
order to facilitate the quick execution of these activities and ensure quality in the fragile and 
conflict affected environment of Somalia, they will be executed by the World Bank on behalf of 
the Client.17  
 
21. 
The infrastructure investments to be studied in Kismayo and Baidoa have been selected using the 
criteria listed below which were agreed to between the Bank and the Government (both federal and state 
levels) in preparatory consultations: 
 
(i) 
Strategic investments that contribute to urban resilience. The investment should be aligned 
with a broader strategic plan or vision of the city. This plan should focus on how to make the 
city more resilient.  
(ii) 
Inclusiveness. Investments identified should be as inclusive as possible, i.e. incorporate needs 
of the IDPs, returnees, refugees and host communities.  The investments should be selected 
in a participatory manner in consultations with community representatives.  
(iii) 
Maximizing development impact.  Investments should maximize development impact and 
return on investment, thus avoiding small scale/piece meal investments.  
(iv) 
Coordination/complementarity with ongoing projects.  Investments should avoid overlap with 
ongoing Government and development partner interventions and try to complement and 
build on these activities.  
(v) 
Labor intensity. Investments should provide short term income generation opportunities for 
vulnerable groups.  
(vi) 
Sustainability. Investments should build in operations and maintenance measures to ensure 
that they are sustained over the long term.  
(vii) 
Government visibility. Investments should be visible to citizens and highlight the 
Government’s (both federal and state levels) lead in implementation so as to strengthen their 
legitimacy.  
 
                                            
17 Bank execution on behalf of the Recipient was approved by the Regional Vice President on October 5, 2018.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 14 of 38 
 
22. 
The AF introduces a restructuring of the project components to include one component for 
Technical Studies in Kismayo and Baidoa and one component for Project Implementation Capacity Support 
across the two new cities of Kismayo and Baidoa, some project coordination work continued in 
Mogadishu, and winding down activities in Garowe and Hargeisa. This restructuring replaces the 
component structure in the original project with one component for each city. The component on cross-
cutting activities is being removed. These components are described in more detail below. This 
restructuring of the components is to better align with the Grant Agreements and Agreement Letters 
linked to this project (see Section C below). An itemized budget for the full project is given in Section B 
below.  
 
Component 1: Technical Studies (US$1.94 million) 
 
23. 
This component will cover all technical studies to be carried out under SUIPP AF in preparation 
for the follow on SURP SOP2 which includes: (i) technical studies and engineering designs for priority 
investments; (ii) environment and social due diligence work; (iii) institutional assessments of 
implementing agencies; and (iv) any other necessary analytical work.  
 
24. 
Technical studies for the priority investments. Based on the preliminary consultations with the 
Government and findings of the rapid urban assessment undertaken in Kismayo and Baidoa, priority 
investments are likely to be urban roads, along with corresponding drainage system, sidewalks, and 
streetlighting. Under the SUIPP AF, a feasibility study and preliminary engineering design study will be 
undertaken for the long list of roads to examine which road segments are the most cost-effective and 
strategically important considering the pre-agreed selection criteria. The shortlist of roads will be finalized 
using the findings from these studies and through a participatory decision-making process that includes 
state and district-level governments, community (with representatives of the vulnerable such as women, 
poor, youth, and IDPs), and the private sector. Once the shortlist of the roads is developed, the team will 
develop detailed engineering designs for the shortlisted investments. Community consultations will also 
be undertaken in each of the relevant catchment areas to determine how they can participate in and 
benefit from the implementation and maintenance of the physical investments.  
 
25. 
Environmental and social (E&S) due diligence work will include the following activities: (i) a 
baseline survey of environmental and social data, capacity, and potential impacts that would help to 
identify E&S mitigations, but also areas of potential enhancement of project outcomes, and provide 
sufficient E&S context for the subsequent design process; (ii) the development of an environmental and 
social management framework, which would constitute a generic tool for managing social and 
environmental risks related to the long list of investments, regardless of funding source for use by entities 
such as local governments; and (iii) the development of a resettlement policy framework which would 
constitute a generic tool for managing any resettlement or compensation issues that may arise related to 
the long list of investments.  
 
26. 
Institutional assessments. An assessment of district governments (which functions as the de facto 
municipal governments) and other relevant agencies will be undertaken for the detailed preparation and 
execution of institutional strengthening activities to be supported under the follow-on SURP. The 
assessment will focus on basic functionality, performance, strategic planning capacity, technical and 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 15 of 38 
 
operational capacity, fiduciary systems, transparency and accountability mechanisms and environmental 
and social management capacity. 
 
27. 
Other Analytical Studies. Urban infrastructure development projects can have both intended and 
unintended socio-economic and political impacts and outcomes that can vary based on different 
population groups such as men, women, female-headed households, the poor, host communities and the 
displaced, influencing their access to land, services, and jobs. The local power dynamics can also influence 
the process and outcome of the project. This component will therefore undertake a qualitative socio-
economic assessment for the target cities. The study will undertake a stakeholder analysis and political-
economy analysis to better understand the local power dynamics in each city. The study will examine how 
the local power dynamics may influence the participatory decision-making process, levels of participation 
in project activities (such as labor-intensive works), and maintenance of the infrastructure to be financed 
under SURP. At the same time, the study will also try to identify both positive and negative impacts the 
urban infrastructure investments may have on various population groups, and how negative impacts may 
be mitigated to the extent possible. For example, with urban investments, land value can increase which 
may lead to the forced eviction of IDPs or informal vendors. Alternatively, improved access may result in 
positive socio-economic outcomes. Additional analytic works may be considered as needs emerge.   
 
Component 2: Project Implementation Capacity Support (US$1.06 million) 
 
28. 
Subcomponent 1: Mogadishu Municipality (US$60,000). To help the two new cities, Kismayo and 
Baidoa, to liaise with the federal government and also to foster peer-to-peer learning across the cities 
that have been supported by SUIPP AF and follow-on SURP, a program coordinator will be assigned in 
Mogadishu. This program coordinator will be appointed in consultation with Kismayo and Baidoa 
stakeholders.  
 
29. 
Subcomponent 2: Kismayo Municipality (US$500,000). In order to establish sufficient capacity to 
prepare and implement the SURP, a PIU will be established within the Kismayo municipal/district 
government comprising a full-time project coordinator, a procurement specialist, a finance specialist, a 
project engineer, a social and environmental safeguards specialist and a monitoring and evaluation 
specialist. Operating and minor equipment costs related to the recruitment and employment of these 
positions will also be incurred. Training and capacity building for the PIU staff on fiduciary management, 
procurement, safeguards, project management, and monitoring and evaluation will be conducted based 
on their capacity and needs. The PIU will prepare safeguards instruments, namely theEnvironment and 
Social Management Plans (ESMPs)/Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for the prioritized shortlist of 
investments.  Finally, costs for the financial audit would be covered under this component. A program 
coordinator, who will oversee both the SUIPP and the SUIPP AF, will help Kismayo liaise with the federal 
government. The program coordinator will also help coordinate activities across all target cities, foster 
cross-fertilization and peer learning.  
 
30. 
Subcomponent 3: Baidoa Municipality (US$500,000). In order to establish sufficient capacity to 
prepare and implement the SURP, a PIU will be established within the Baidoa municipal/district 
government comprising a full-time project coordinator, a procurement specialist, a finance specialist, a 
project engineer and a social and environmental safeguards specialist. Operating and minor equipment 
costs related to the recruitment and employment of these positions will also be incurred. Training and 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 16 of 38 
 
capacity building for the PIU staff on fiduciary management, procurement, safeguards, project 
management, and monitoring and evaluation will be conducted based on their capacity and needs. The 
PIU will prepare safeguards instruments (ESMPs/RAPs) for the prioritized shortlist of investments. Costs 
for the financial audit would be covered under this component. A program coordinator, who will oversee 
both the SUIPP and the SUIPP AF, will help Baidoa liaise with the federal government. The program 
coordinator will also help coordinate activities across all target cities, foster cross-fertilization and peer 
learning.  
 
B. Project Cost and Financing 
31. 
The project will be financed by a Recipient Executed Trust Fund (RETF) sourced from the MPF. 
Component 1 for Technical Studies would be executed by the World Bank on behalf of the Recipient 
(BEBR) whereas Component 2 – Project Implementation Capacity Support would be Recipient executed 
(RE). Table 2 shows the cost table proposed for the SUIPP AF.  
 
Table 2: SUIPP AF Cost Table 
Project Components 
Project Cost 
Grant 
Financing 
% 
Financing 
Execution 
Component 1: Technical Studies 
1.94 
1.94 
100 
World Bank  
Feasibility studies, preliminary 
engineering designs, safeguards 
assessments 
1.68 
1.68 
 
 
Institutional Assessments 
0.15 
0.15 
 
 
Other Analytical Studies 
0.11 
0.11 
 
 
Component 2: Project 
Implementation Capacity 
Support 
1.06 
1.06 
100 
Recipient 
Subcomponent 1 – Mogadishu 
Municipality  
0.06 
0.06 
 
Mogadishu 
Municipality 
Subcomponent 2 – Kismayo 
Municipality 
0.50 
0.50 
 
Kismayo 
Municipality 
Subcomponent 3 – Baidoa 
Municipality 
0.50 
0.50 
 
Baidoa Municipality 
Total  
3.0 
3.0 
 
 
 
 
C. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
32. 
The institutional and implementation arrangements will largely be the same as in the parent 
project. Project activities under Component 1: Technical Studies will be executed by the World Bank on 
behalf of the Recipient due to the client’s low capacity. Project activities under Component 2 which 
include the appointment of the program coordinator in Mogadishu and liaison with all cities, recruitment 
of PIU staff and their capacity building activities will be undertaken by the client. As under the original 
SUIPP, the Bank team will work closely with the client in undertaking these activities, particularly the 
Kismayo and Baidoa municipal governments as well as the government designated inter-ministerial 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 17 of 38 
 
technical teams at the state-level. Moreover, for policy issues, the World Bank will consult with the inter-
ministerial committee at the state level as well as with relevant ministries at the federal level.   
 
33. 
A Grant Agreement will be signed between the World Bank and the federal Ministry of Finance 
for the Recipient executed grants. The Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) will have overall 
responsibility in coordination of the project. Both the Federal Member State (FMS) of Jubbaland and South 
West State will oversee the project implementation while the respective municipalities will be responsible 
for the day-to-day project implementation. For the World Bank executed Grants, an agreement between 
the FGS and the Bank will be signed. Subsidiary Agreements between the federal Ministry of Finance and 
State governments will outline the respective roles and responsibilities of these entities in the project.  
 
D. Lessons Learned from the Parent Project 
34. 
Given that SURP is the first project to be implemented through municipalities, a preparatory 
phase under SUIPP prior to commencing civil works is crucial. The Bank only reengaged with Somalia in 
2013, and all the Bank-financed projects to date have been implemented at the federal or state level. 
Given the weak capacity and unfamiliarity with the World Bank procedures at the municipal level, it is 
essential to have a preparatory phase under SUIPP. While contexts and capacities vary across cities, all 
SUIPP cities in the parent project benefited greatly from this preparatory phase. The PIUs in the original 
three cities were able to become familiar with the Bank’s procurement processes, financial reporting 
requirements and safeguard policies and procedures. The PIUs in Mogadishu and Garowe in particular are 
now able to commence procurement for civil works under the follow on SURP immediately due to the 
training and hands on learning they gained from SUIPP. Under SUIPP AF, a program coordinator based in 
Mogadishu will be hired to help Kismayo and Baidoa better liaise with the federal government and also 
facilitate peer-to-peer learning with Mogadishu and Garowe, who have accumulated experience working 
with World Bank financed projects.  
 
35. 
Preparatory phase under SUIPP AF helps better define the roles and functions of different levels 
of government and across different agencies. As Somalia’s political institutions are still in their infancy, 
there can be ambiguity in the division of labor across different levels of government as well as across 
different agencies. Ensuring all levels of government and relevant agencies are involved in the project 
planning, however, can be a time-consuming process. To this end, the preparatory phase under SUIPP AF 
allows the necessary time for the Government to work out the optimal division of labor among 
themselves. Down the line, a clear division of labor allows for a smoother project implementation and 
garners political support from the client. 
  
36. 
With the Bank’s limited accessibility on the ground, it is important to build on existing 
participatory platforms and systems established under other programs.  For any investment 
prioritization, it is important to adopt a participatory decision-making process to the extent possible 
where all stakeholders such as the Government, IDPs, women, youths, traditional leaders and the urban 
poor can have a voice. Such an approach improves communication between the local government and 
the communities and fosters ownership over the investments to be provided under the project that can 
lead to better operation and maintenance. However, the World Bank’s accessibility to the grassroots is 
limited. Under the original SUIPP, the team tried to reach out to different segments of the society through 
the municipal government, but the participatory planning became superficial with a possible selection 
bias in the participants. To ensure a substantive participatory approach, the SUIPP AF will utilize the 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 18 of 38 
 
participatory approach and platform that have proven effective under the UN Midnimo project. (See para. 
10 for details.) 
 
37. 
Ensure participation of the municipalities in the preparation of technical studies to improve the 
quality of these studies and ensure cross learning. While the feasibility studies and engineering designs 
will be prepared by the World Bank on behalf of the Recipient by engaging United Nations Office for 
Project Services (UNOPS), it would be crucial to ensure UNOPS works closely with the municipalities 
throughout the process. This is important for ensuring the studies incorporate local knowledge and are as 
accurate as possible. This is also key for ensuring there is some knowledge transfer to municipalities on 
how feasibility studies are undertaken. 
 
38. 
It is important to keep the project design adaptable to possible scale-up in the future. While 
SUIPP parent project was designed as a stand-alone preparatory project, SUIPP AF has been redesigned 
to ensure that SUIPP can serve as a vehicle to establish project planning and implementation capacity at 
the municipal level. Once such capacity is established, cities can raise funds from other donors to address 
the paramount needs on the ground.  
 
E. Alignment with Higher Level Objectives 
39. 
SUIPP’s scaled-up activities are consistent with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY19-
22). The new CPF focuses on two areas, namely: (i) strengthening institutions and expanding access to 
services; and (ii) unlocking inclusive growth, while building Somalia’s structural resilience to fragility and 
shocks is highlighted as a cross-cutting consideration. Under the “institutions and services” pillar, 
improvement of urban governance and municipal services is one of the four main objectives, and SUIPP 
and the follow-on investment project, SURP, are listed as directly contributing to the achievement of the 
objective. Additionally, building government capacity and providing services through municipal 
institutions to meet the increased demands are noted to contribute to building resilience.  
 
IV. 
KEY RISKS 
 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
High 
2. Macroeconomic 
Moderate 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
Moderate 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
Moderate 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
High  
6. Fiduciary 
Substantial 
7. Environment and Social 
Substantial 
8. Stakeholders 
High 
9. Other (Security) 
High 
10. Overall 
High 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 19 of 38 
 
40. 
The overall risk rating for SUIPP AF is High. The following high and substantial risks are the result 
of the challenging operational environment, continued insecurity, and inadequate institutional capacity. 
The World Bank will provide intensive capacity building and oversight to the PIUs to be established in 
Kismayo and Baidoa.  
 
41. 
Insecurity risk is High. There are areas in Kismayo and Baidoa that remain insecure which affects 
access to locations and insecurity for staff. This may prevent or delay work and may make monitoring 
difficult. The chief mitigation measure will be the use of consulting firms, NGOs, UNOPs and other UN 
agencies for much of the technical work. Agencies that have appropriate expertise and which are not 
precluded, by regulation, from working in environments in which the World Bank itself may find it difficult 
to operate will be selected. The World Bank team will visit these sites at certain points to ensure that work 
is being undertaken satisfactorily.  
 
42. 
Political and governance risks are High. In order to execute the work successfully, the World Bank 
will need to rely on its key counterpart institutions for close cooperation throughout and on efficient 
decision-making at critical points. Yet, the relationship between the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) 
and Federal Member States remains fragile. Horizontal and vertical divisions of labor across different 
government agencies are ill defined. These can lead to competition over power and resources over this 
project across different levels of government as well as across different ministries. Such political 
competition may complicate decision-making, make reaching consensus difficult, and be the source of 
delay. Mitigating measures will include investment in sustained client dialogue, with ground presence of 
the World Bank team in Somalia, setting up of an inter-ministerial committee at the outset both at the 
national and state levels to ensure transparency and inclusivity, and designation of government focal 
points for the project prior to project commencement.  
 
43. 
The institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risks are High. Capacity and 
authority in Somalia, especially at the sub-national level, is weak given the history of conflict and mistrust 
with public institutions. Moreover, government institutions do not have experience managing 
development partner-funded projects as most projects bypass the government systems. Mitigation 
measures include staffing the PIUs with qualified consultants, in conformity with the guidelines of the Civil 
Service Commission; to provide regular training and support from a third-party consulting firm and the 
World Bank team.   
 
44. 
Fiduciary risks are Substantial.  The financial management and procurement environment in 
Somalia remains challenging.  Levels of mismanagement, fraud, lack of transparency and corruption exist.  
Although anticorruption and public-sector regulations are in place, problems persist, contributing to low 
levels of trust in government institutions. The fiduciary risk rating has been increased from Moderate in 
the parent project to Substantial in the AF due to the limited prior engagement with municipalities in 
Kismayo and Baidoa. Mitigation measures for governance issues have been built into the project design 
in the form of strict fiduciary control mechanism and application of World Bank fiduciary rules as well as 
a focus on social accountability. The project will ensure that the PIU always has in place dedicated 
procurement and financial management specialists who are adequately trained.  
 
45. 
Environment and Social Safeguard risks are Substantial. While these risks in the SUIPP AF are 
low, there are potential downstream impacts of the investments in the follow on SURP SOP2 which raises 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 20 of 38 
 
the risk rating. These potential risks will be mitigated through the preparation of safeguards documents 
under the SUIPP AF – Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF), Environment and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and RAPs. Moreover, safeguards 
staff will be recruited into the PIUs for both cities to monitor safeguards implementation in the follow on 
SURP.  
 
46. 
Stakeholder risks are High. As stated in para 34 above, there is a lack of clarity on the division of 
labor among Ministries, agencies as well as between the federal and state ministries. Moreover, there is 
a lack of clarity on the roles and responsibilities of the municipalities. This can result in poor coordination 
and potential slowdown in implementation of project activities. Mitigation measures include preparation 
of subsidiary agreements between various levels of government involved in implementation which clearly 
outline the respective roles and responsibilities for each entity. The task team will ensure adherence to 
these agreements during supervision.  
 
 
V. 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
A. Economic and Financial (if applicable) Analysis 
 
46.  
Given that the project will support feasibility and preliminary design studies and the recruitment 
of technical assistance only, the cost of the project is limited to the US$3m investment from MPF. The 
economic benefit of the project will derive from the enhanced urban infrastructure and strengthened 
urban management institutions supported by the investment activities under SURP SOP2 which will follow 
from the preliminary design and Technical Assistance (TA) work to be undertaken under the SUIPP AF. 
Overall rates of return to these investments (e.g. roads) are expected to be high but cannot be calculated 
at this point.  
 
B. Technical 
 
47. 
Preliminary assessments and consultations undertaken by the World Bank Task Team during 
missions to Kismayo, Baidoa, and Mogadishu indicate that the identified investment priorities (likely urban 
roads with drainage, sidewalks, and streetlighting) for which the feasibility studies and preliminary design 
work under SUIPP will be undertaken are sensible and technically feasible. This view must, however, be 
qualified by the fact that in some cases – particularly in Baidoa – it has not been possible to visit the sites 
of the initial investments, and secondary information is scarce. In addition, conditions – particularly, but 
not only, those related to security – may make the implementation of project activities difficult or even 
impossible. It will certainly add to their costs. It thus needs to be recognized that the feasibility of at least 
some of the proposed project activities is difficult to determine at the outset, and that the work conducted 
under the SUIPP will further inform this assessment. The cost estimates for the activities to be undertaken 
in the two cities of Kismayo and Baidoa are subject to considerable variations once the feasibility and 
preliminary design engineering has commenced. This might necessitate the reduction in the scope of 
works should the true costs escalate. 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 21 of 38 
 
C. Financial Management 
 
48. 
Background. The SUIPP AF will involve both BEBR and RE activities. The RE activities comprise 
limited and simple activities related to the employment of a program coordinator based in Mogadishu 
and employment of specialist technical staff by the key implementing agencies i.e. Kismayo and Baidoa 
municipal governments. FM assessment has already been conducted for Mogadishu and has been found 
satisfactory. The additional financing will leverage and rely on the FM arrangements of the existing SUIPP 
project. The updated FM assessment conducted during missions indicate that although the External 
Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS) at the State Ministry of Finance has the PFM capacity to handle the 
FM responsibilities related to these activities, significant levels of fiduciary risks that are likely to affect 
the project do exist. These include (i) weak legal PFM Frameworks; (ii) lack of prior experience in the 
implementation of World Bank supported projects; (iii) inadequate financial management competencies 
and internal controls mechanisms at the municipalities/district level particularly works contracts 
management and payment for works; (iv) lack of or weak intergovernmental fiscal relations arrangement 
frameworks between the FGS and the regional governments, as well as internally between the State 
governments and local authorities and;  (v) very rudimentary banking arrangements. Various mitigating 
measures will be designed both specific to the project and as part of other World Bank/Donor 
engagements in the country. Given the consideration for Use of Country Systems (UCS), the project, so 
far as is practical, will adopt UCS in various aspects of the project’s financial management arrangements. 
These include financial planning, budgeting, funds flow arrangements, banking, internal control 
framework, accounting, reporting, internal and external audit arrangements. The project will institute 
appropriate oversight arrangements, staffing and capacity building initiatives. The project will also focus 
on developing financial management capacity as part of project activities through targeted financial 
management technical assistance with a clear requirement for knowledge transfer incorporated. 
 
49. 
Project Financial Management System. Dedicated financial management units (EAFS) established 
within the Office of the Accountant General at FGS and Ministries of Finance in Jubbaland (Kismayo) and 
South West States (Baidoa) will manage the project’s financial management arrangements. These Units 
have been operational for the last three years and they are charged with the responsibility of ensuring 
harmonization of financial management arrangements for externally funded projects using country PFM 
systems, donor co-ordination to mitigate duplication and proliferation of donor funded projects. The EAFS 
units in consultation with the PIUs at the Municipalities will have overall day to day management of the 
project financial management arrangements. The World Bank will work closely with the authorities to 
support and strengthen the use of country PFM systems without creating parallel arrangements and in 
line with the provisions of the ‘Somalia New Deal’. The FM arrangements will be continuously monitored 
through frequent FM supervisions and updated to reflect the emerging issues in the PFM systems. For the 
payment of Mogadishu based program coordinator, the existing system established under SUIPP parent 
project will be utilized.  
 
50. 
Budgeting.  In each region (Baidoa and Kismayo), the Municipalities PIUs will work closely with 
each of the respective EAFS units to prepare and submit the project annual work plan; budget and cash 
flow forecast. The annual work plans and the cash forecast will be submitted to the World Bank for review 
and clearance before the final estimates are incorporated in the annual appropriation budgets.   The work 
plans, cash flow projections and budget will include the figures for the year segregated by months and 
quarters. The cash forecasts will reflect the detailed specifications for project activities, schedules 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 22 of 38 
 
(including procurement plan), and anticipated expenditures. Budget utilization reports shall be prepared 
from the financial management system as part of the internal government(s) periodic reports as well as 
quarterly reports submitted to the World Bank. For the program coordinator, the budget developed by 
Benadir Regional Administration (BRA) will be appropriated by the Ministry of Finance.  
 
51. 
Accounting. The project expenditures will be recognized, captured, analyzed, summarized and 
reported on cash basis.  These will be supported with appropriate records and documentation to track 
commitments and to safeguard assets. The project budgets and expenditure will be classified to facilitate 
the preparation of relevant reports and financial Statements, including information on total project 
expenditures; total expenditure on each project component/activity, and analysis of that total 
expenditure into various categories of goods, training, consultants and other procurement and 
disbursement categories. Standard Chart of Accounts (SCoA) will be used to map the project activities into 
the bespoke financial management information systems (Bisan at the Federal Member States and Somali 
Financial Management Information System(SFMIS) at the Federal level) to facilitate the preparation of 
relevant reports and financial statements, including information on total project expenditures; 
component/sub-components, categories and economic items (object codes) among other essential 
dimensional analysis. All the project financial management records will be maintained through the 
system. Eligibility of expenditures will be based on the actual amount expended as evidenced by 
appropriate supporting documents. The project financial management arrangements at the PIU will be 
outlined in the Project Implementation Manual whereas those related to EAFS FM activities are outlined 
in the respective EAFS Manuals (or Comprehensive Operations and Accounting Procedure Manual – 
COAPM). The project accounting will cover all project funds and any other contributions under the project.  
Accounting records will be maintained in US dollars. The respective EAFS units in consultation with the 
PIUs will ensure that:  
 
(i) 
All important business and financial processes are adhered to; 
(ii) 
Adequate internal controls and procedures are in place; 
(iii) 
Interim un-audited Financial Reports (IFRs) are prepared on a timely basis; 
(iv) 
The financial statements are prepared on a timely basis and in accordance with International 
Public-Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS cash-basis); 
(v) 
The external audit is completed on time and audit findings and recommendations/ issues raised 
in the management letter are implemented expeditiously. 
 
52. 
The Project Implementation Manual (PIM) will outline specific internal controls related to internal 
and independent review and approval of works interim payments certificates, authentication and 
management of contracts security documents, calculation and retirement of retention amounts as well 
as measures to mitigate potential penalties. The EAFS units and PIUs will also ensure that the contracts 
are consistent with the invoices and payment request before processing. They will also monitor and report 
on the utilization of project funds, including the fiduciary standards complied with and the reliability of 
the FM systems. The Fixed Assets Register relating to the project will be prepared and regularly updated. 
Physical verification of outputs and assets will be carried out periodically – at least once every year. The 
Fixed Assets Register will reflect details of suppliers, description and location of goods, original cost, 
disposal of assets, asset reference (identification) number; Serial or registration number; date of 
purchase, price (cost) and/or valuation, additions to the asset; condition of asset, useful life and residual 
value; disposal. A Contracts Register will also be maintained in respect of all contracts with consultants, 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 23 of 38 
 
contractors and suppliers. The EAFS units will prepare Contract Status Reports quarterly as part of the 
IFRs. Control procedures over fixed assets and contracts management will be the responsibility of the PIU. 
 
53. 
Financial Reporting. The EAFS in consultation with the PIUs will prepare Quarterly IFRs covering 
all project funds for monitoring the implementation of the project and submitted to the World Bank within 
45 days of the end of each fiscal quarter but the periodicity shall be revised based on project fiduciary risk 
rating. The IFRs will be generated directly from the Core PFM systems (Financial Management Information 
Systems- FMIS). The IFRs will cover all funds received for the project as well as counterpart or Government 
funds received under the project, if any. The accounting system will ensure that financial reports are 
designed to provide relevant and timely information to the project management, implementing agencies, 
and various stakeholders monitoring the project’s performance. All the original financial records shall be 
maintained at the EAFS Units. The EAFS will maintain adequate filing and archival system of all accounting 
and relevant supporting documents for review by the Bank’s FM team during supervision missions and for 
audit purposes. The EAFS unit at the FGS in consultation with the States EAFS units and PIUs will also 
prepare Project annual financial statements (PAFS) for the entire project. The content of the statements 
will be documented in the Audit ToRs to be agreed between the Bank and the Government. The PAFS will 
be prepared by EAFS in accordance with Cash Basis International Public-Sector Accounting Standards 
(IPSAS). The AFS shall include adequate notes and disclosures consistent with the cash basis of financial 
reporting under the IPSAS. 
 
54. 
External Auditing. The Offices of the Auditor General at the FGS in consultation with the States 
Auditor General has the constitutional responsibility to carry out independent audit of the project. The 
project will allocate adequate funds to support the engagement of an external audit firm to work with the 
staff of the respective Offices of the Auditor General with special reference to International Standards on 
Auditing (ISA 800) - Auditor’s Report on Special Purpose Audit Engagements. The audited project annual 
financial statements, management letters together with any additional information required will be 
submitted to the World Bank within six months after the end of the financial year. The audits shall be in 
conformity with the World Bank’s audit requirements and in accordance with internationally recognized 
auditing standards. The respective Offices of the Auditor General will express an opinion on the Financial 
Statements in compliance with International Standards for Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAI); and, 
prepare a Management Letter giving observations and comments, and providing recommendations for 
improvements in accounting records, systems, controls and compliance with financial covenants in the 
Grant Agreement(s). 
 
55. 
Flow of Funds and Banking Arrangements. The Federal Government on behalf of the States will 
open a separate project Designated Bank Account (DA) at the Central Bank of Somalia (or a Financial 
Institution Acceptable to the World Bank). The States Ministries of Finance in consultation with the EAFS 
Units will open Project Accounts (PAs) at the State level for purposes of drawdown of proceeds from the 
DA. Funds drawdown from the DA to the State PA will be based on approved cash flow and subsequently 
accounted through Statement of Expenditures (SoEs). Further funds flow processes and procedures shall 
be defined in the PIM. All the expenditures incurred through the DAs and PAs and as well as those 
submitted to the World Bank for direct payments will be justified, supported and eligible as shall be 
defined in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and the Grant Agreement(s).  All project withdrawal 
applications to the World Bank will be made in US dollars and will be submitted online through the client 
connection.  Replenishment and reimbursement Withdrawal Applications will be accompanied by SOEs in 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 24 of 38 
 
accordance with the procedures established in the disbursement Letter and the Bank’s Disbursement 
Guidelines. Detailed disbursement arrangements will be documented in the Disbursement Letters. The 
PIUs, EAFS Units in consultation with the FGS Offices Accountant General will institute adequate controls 
in the management of the DAs and PAs.  The signatories to the DAs and PAs (Treasury Cheques/Payment 
Instructions/Electronic Funds Transfer) and Withdrawal Applications will include at least two bank 
account signatories’ categories (either from each panel must sign) in each of the following panels: -  
 
Designated Accounts (DA) Signatories 
 
Federal Government 
• 
Panel A: Director General of MoF (with Director of Administration as alternate)  
• 
Panel B: Accountant General (with Deputy Accountant General as alternate) 
 
States (Jubbaland and South West) 
• 
Panel A: Director General (with Director of Revenue as alternate)  
• 
Panel B: Treasurer (with Deputy Treasurer as alternate) 
 
56. 
The EAFS units in consultation with the PIUs will prepare detailed cash flow projection segregated 
into activities for which funds shall be paid as a) direct payments b) from the DA c) from PAs d) operating 
costs. Payments from the PAs shall be limited to operational activities. Disbursement of funds from the 
Designated Accounts (DAs) to the PAs shall be based on SOEs to be prepared the PIU and submitted to 
the EAFS Units on periodic basis. The statements of expenditures shall be supported by transaction ledger 
listing, bank reconciliation statements and a bank reconciliation statements. Management of the project 
account procedures shall be detailed in the PIM and comprehensive operating procedure manuals ( 
COPMs).  
 
Figure 1. Funds flow process 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Payments 
Reports & information 
Payments 
Reports
Payment Requests 
Funds disbursement
MPF  
World Bank 
Designated Bank Account 
Each for FGS and Puntland)  
(Acceptable Financial Institution)  
EAFS Unit  
(Office of the Accountant 
General)  
Project Implementation Unit 
 
Banking 
data  
Vendor payments 
(Consultants, contractors etc.   
Withdrawal applications  
Direct payments 
Project Account (each for Kismayo 
& Baidoa Municipalities) 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 25 of 38 
 
Each of the EAFS units will maintain: 
 
(i) A DA in US Dollar (US$) for the project component in a financial institution acceptable to the 
World Bank18. The ceiling of the DA will be based on SOE. 
(ii) Project component funds will be transferred into the DA/PAs against an approved Withdrawal 
Application/SOEs to be prepared by the EAFS units.  Subsequent withdrawals will be based on SOE 
and after the change to report-based disbursement, they will be based on the actual amount 
expended with a forecast of expenditure and cash flow needs for the next six months.  
(iii) Detailed disbursement arrangements will be documented in the Disbursement Letter.  
 
57. 
Staffing. Kismayo and Baidoa municipal governments will work closely with the State EAFS teams 
to carry out the project financial management functions. The implementing agencies’ financial 
management staff will work closely with the respective Ministries of Finance at the state level to ensure 
that project activities are well recorded and incorporated in governments budget and financial 
statements. Options in recruitment of external FM staff through States Civil Service Commissions to 
support the project activities and PFM capacities of the municipalities will be explored.  
 
58. 
Fraud and Corruption. Possibility of circumventing the internal control system with colluding 
practices such as bribes, abuse of administrative positions is a critical issue and may include: (a) complex 
accounting and internal controls inherent with the construction work contracts in particular management 
of contracts security documents, retentions, penalties and payments certificates (b) poor filing and 
records; (c) nascent intergovernmental fiscal relations between FGS, States and Municipalities (d) lack of 
budget discipline; (e) unauthorized commitment to suppliers, bypassing budget and expenses vetting 
procedures; (f) uncertainty over the banking arrangements supporting the project g) potential exposure 
to money laundering, and, h) insecurity and political instability.  These are mitigated as follows: (i) specific 
aspects on corruption auditing will be included in the external audit and monitoring arrangements ToR; 
(ii) FM Procedures (as part of EAFS Manual or COAPM and PIM) approved and in operation for the project 
(iii) strong FM arrangements (including qualified Project Accountants in the EAFS Units (iv) periodic IFRs 
including budget execution and monitoring; and (v) measures to improve social accountability and 
transparency that are built into the project design by ensuring that project reports are available to the 
public vi) Annual PFM forums will be held. The external audit will pay special attention to the risks of 
material misstatement of the financial statements due to fraud, in line with International Standards on 
Auditing (ISA) 240: "The auditor’s responsibilities relating to fraud in an audit of financial statements"). 
 
D. Procurement 
59. 
Guidelines. Procurement under the proposed AF will be carried out in accordance with the 
requirements in the Procurement Regulations for Borrowers under IPF: Goods, Works, Non-Consulting 
Services and Consulting Services dated July 1, 2016 (revised November 2017 and August 2018); “Guidelines 
on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development  (IBRD) Loans and IDA Credits and Grants (revised as of July 1, 2016)”; 
and provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement. Somalia being a Fragility, Conflict and Violence 
(FCV) country, Procurement under the projects will be processed under special procurement 
                                            
18 On terms and conditions in the World Bank Disbursement Guidelines for Projects (May 1, 2006:11). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 26 of 38 
 
arrangements referred to in Paragraph 12 of the World Bank Policy Investment Project Financing (IPF) 
dated November 10, 2017. 
 
60. 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) and Procurement Plan. As per the 
Procurement Rules and Regulations, the borrower has developed a PPSD, based on which the 
Procurement Plans (PPs) for the first 12 months have been prepared. The PPs sets out the selection 
methods to be followed by the borrower during project implementation in the procurement of goods, 
works, non-consulting and consulting services. The PP will be updated at least every 12 months, or as 
required, to reflect the actual project implementation needs, but each update will require World Bank 
approval. All PPs will be publicly disclosed in accordance with the World Bank Group disclosure policy. 
 
61. 
Under SUIPP AF, the major procurements will be undertaken in respect of World Bank Executed 
activities. In addition, some project funding is to be used for Recipient Executed activities. These 
procurements will be simple i.e. to procure qualified individuals (viz. Project Coordinator, Procurement 
Specialist, Safeguard Specialist) at the two locations of Kismayo and Baidoa to assist with preparation 
(and, later, implementation) of SURP. This activity will be led by the respective municipal governments 
under the supervision of the inter-ministerial committees that have been established in each state. An 
initial procurement assessment of these agencies suggests that although they have some procurement 
experience, they lack capacity and previous experience in the World Bank Procurement procedures and 
hence will require support to undertake the necessary procurements according to Bank procedures 
satisfactorily.  In both Baidoa and Kismayo, the necessary procurement support would be provided by 
EAFS of the State Ministry of Finance until full time Procurement Specialists are recruited. The project will 
hire the procurement specialists first, who in turn will handle the procurement of other PIU staff.  
 
62. 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP): The World Bank’s STEP system will be 
used to prepare, clear, and update PPs and conduct all procurement transactions for the project. Staff of 
the PIUs will be trained in using STEP. 
 
E. Social (including Safeguards) 
 
63. 
The project is financing the preparation of feasibility studies and preliminary design studies for 
the long list of roads, and detailed engineering designs for shortlisted priority roads in Kismayo and 
Baidoa. Due to potential downstream impacts in the follow-on SURP SOP2, OP/BP 4.12 – Involuntary 
Resettlement is triggered. The rehabilitation and construction of roads in Kismayo and Baidoa may involve 
land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to resources or 
livelihoods. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be developed to guide the management of 
resettlement caused by land acquisition as well as specific safeguard instrument – Abbreviated 
Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) for the prioritized investments that require land acquisition for the 
prioritized investments.  
 
64. 
The RPF/ESMF primarily provides the flexibility to changes in priority investments – which may 
happen due to frequent political transitions and changes in the Government’s priorities and fills the 
anticipated capacity gaps in the newly established PIUs for undertaking directly the preparation of specific 
safeguard instruments namely the ESMPs and ARAPs. An ESMF will also be prepared to screen the long 
list of investments and to provide guidance for the preparation of the ESMPs for the shortlisted priority 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 27 of 38 
 
investments. UNOPS will, in the process of developing the ESMF/RPF, transfer skills for the subsequent 
tasks by the PIUs of preparing specific safeguard instruments.  Draft TORs for developing an ESMF and a 
RPF as well as TORs for the preparation of specific safeguard instruments ESMPs and ARAPs will be 
produced and disclosed in country and at Infoshop. The TORs will guide the preparation of the ESMF/RFP, 
the ESMP and the ARAP for SURP SOP2 to comply with World Bank safeguard policies.  
 
F. Environment (including Safeguards) 
65. 
While the project will not finance any physical activities or civil works for the potential 
investments in urban infrastructure in Kismayo and Baidoa, it has been assigned the environment category 
B. The rationale for this rating is that the project will finance the preparation of feasibility study and 
preliminary design studies for the long list of roads, and detailed engineering designs for shortlisted 
priority roads in the two cities. These activities are expected to incur downstream environmental and 
social impacts commensurate with the preparation of ESMPs.  
 
66. 
Two environmental safeguards policies - OP/BP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment and OP/BP 4.11 
- Physical and Cultural Resources are deemed applicable due to potential adverse environmental impacts 
in the follow-on SURP SOP2. This includes deposition of solid wastes, dust emission, and health and safety 
of construction workers and communities - are expected to relate mainly to construction activities during 
project implementation and will occur concurrently.  OP/BP 4.11 - Physical and Cultural Resources is 
applicable owing to the potential for chance find of cultural or archeological significance during 
construction, including the existence of some historic buildings around the secondary road investments 
that could potentially be impacted from the construction.  
 
67. 
The final identification of specific investments will be made from the long list of roads and 
technical surveys that would determine the optimal design, construction methods and cost estimates. 
Detailed design work for the shortlisted prioritized investments would require the drafting, consultation 
and disclosure of ESMF and RPF as well as developing specific ESIA/ESMPs and RAPs as part of the SUIPP 
AF.  
 
68. 
While the ESMF and RPF will be prepared by UNOPS on behalf of the Recipient, the site specific 
ESIAs/ESMPs and RAPs for the priority roads will be prepared by the respective PIUs.  The Scope of Work 
outlining the above environmental and social studies/preparation of ESMF and RPF, as well as Generic 
ToRs for the preparation of site specific ESIAs/ESMPs and RAPs, have been prepared and will be disclosed 
in-country as feasible and on the World Bank external website.  
 
VI. 
WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS 
 
Grievance Redress 
69. 
Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB) 
supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the 
WB’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed 
in order to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit 
their complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or 
could occur, as a result of WB non-compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 28 of 38 
 
submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank 
Management has been given an opportunity to respond.  For information on how to submit complaints 
to 
the 
World 
Bank’s 
corporate 
Grievance 
Redress 
Service 
(GRS), 
please 
visit 
http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-service. For 
information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit 
www.inspectionpanel.org 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 29 of 38 
 
    
70.   
 
I. 
SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES 
 
 
Changed 
Not Changed 
Implementing Agency 
  ✔ 
   
Project's Development Objectives 
  ✔ 
   
Results Framework 
  ✔ 
   
Components and Cost 
  ✔ 
   
Loan Closing Date(s) 
  ✔ 
   
Disbursements Arrangements 
  ✔ 
   
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
  ✔ 
   
Cancellations Proposed 
     
✔ 
Reallocation between Disbursement Categories 
     
✔ 
EA category 
     
✔ 
Legal Covenants 
     
✔ 
Institutional Arrangements 
     
✔ 
Financial Management 
     
✔ 
Procurement 
     
✔ 
Other Change(s) 
     
✔ 
 
 
II. 
DETAILED CHANGE(S) 
 
IMPLEMENTING AGENCY 
 
 
Implementing Agency Name 
Type 
Action 
Hargeisa Municipality 
Subnational/Local 
Government 
Marked for Deletion 
Mogadishu Municipality 
Subnational/Local 
Government 
No Change 
Hargeisa Water Agency 
Parastatal/Indepen
dent Government 
Institute 
Marked for Deletion 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 30 of 38 
 
Garowe Municipality 
Subnational/Local 
Government 
Marked for Deletion 
Baidoa Municipality 
Subnational/Local 
Government 
 
Kismayo Municipality 
Subnational/Local 
Government 
 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE 
Current PDO 
To provide (i) an assessment of the feasibility of, and preliminary plans for, selected urban investment and 
institutional strengthening activities in southern Somalia, Puntland and Somaliland, and (ii) enhanced project 
preparation and implementation capacity of participating agencies.  
 
Proposed New PDO 
To provide: (i) an assessment of the feasibility of, and preliminary plans for, selected urban investment and 
institutional strengthening activities in targeted cities, and (ii) enhanced project preparation and implementation 
capacity of participating agencies. 
 
  
COMPONENTS 
Current Component Name 
Current Cost 
(US$, millions) 
Action 
Proposed Component 
Name 
Proposed Cost (US$, 
millions) 
Mogadishu 
2.43 Marked for 
Deletion 
Mogadishu 
1.73 
 
0.00 New 
Technical Studies 
1.94 
 
0.00 New 
Project Implementation 
Capacity Support 
1.06 
Garowe 
1.63 Marked for 
Deletion 
Garowe 
0.98 
Hargeisa 
1.68 Marked for 
Deletion 
Hargeisa 
1.03 
Cross-cutting Activities 
1.83 Marked for 
Deletion 
Cross-cutting Activities 
1.83 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 31 of 38 
 
TOTAL 
   7.57  
 
   8.57 
 
 
LOAN CLOSING DATE(S) 
Ln/Cr/Tf 
Status 
Original Closing 
 
Current 
Closing(s)  
 
Proposed  
Closing  
 
Proposed Deadline 
for Withdrawal 
Applications 
TF-A1710 
Effective 
30-Jun-2017 
30-Jun-2018 
31-Dec-2021 
30-Apr-2022 
TF-A1754 
Effective 
30-Jun-2017 
30-Jun-2018 
31-Dec-2021 
30-Apr-2022 
    
DISBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
Change in Disbursement Arrangements 
Yes 
 
 Expected Disbursements (in US$) 
 DISBURSTBL 
Fiscal Year 
Annual 
Cumulative 
2016 
21,462.00 
21,462.00 
2017 
156,420.00 
177,882.00 
2018 
227,085.00 
404,967.00 
2019 
352,311.00 
757,278.00 
2020 
589,467.00 
1,346,745.00 
2021 
819,456.00 
2,166,201.00 
2022 
833,799.00 
3,000,000.00 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
Risk Category 
Latest ISR Rating 
Current Rating 
 
Political and Governance 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
Macroeconomic 
⚫ Low 
⚫ Moderate 
 
Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ Low 
⚫ Moderate 
 
Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ Moderate 
⚫ Moderate 
 
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and 
Sustainability 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 32 of 38 
 
Fiduciary 
⚫ Moderate 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Environment and Social 
⚫ Low 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Stakeholders 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
Other 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
Overall 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
 Safguard_Table 
COMPLIANCE 
Change in Safeguard Policies Triggered 
Yes 
Safeguard Policies Triggered 
Current 
Proposed 
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 
4.01 
 
Yes 
Yes 
Performance Standards for Private 
Sector Activities OP/BP 4.03 
 
No 
No 
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 
 
No 
No 
Forests OP/BP 4.36 
 
No 
No 
Pest Management OP 4.09 
 
No 
No 
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 
4.11 
 
No 
Yes 
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 
 
No 
No 
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 
 
No 
Yes 
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 
 
No 
No 
Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 
 
No 
No 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 
 
No 
No 
   
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 33 of 38 
 
LEGAL COVENANTS2 
LEGAL COVENANTS – Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
Sections and Description 
 
 
SCHEDULE 2: Project Execution 
Section I. 
Institutional and Other Arrangements 
 
D. Project Implementation Manual 
 
The Recipient shall: (a) not later than thirty (30) days after the Effective Date,  adopt the Project Implementation 
Manual, in form and substance to the World Bank, and thereafter (b) carry out the Project in accordance with said  
Project Implementation Manual containing, detailed guidelines and procedures for the implementation of the 
Project, including monitoring and evaluation, procurement, coordination, financial, administrative and accounting 
procedures, corruption and fraud mitigation measures and such other arrangements and procedures as shall be 
required for the Project, and  except as the World Bank shall otherwise agree in writing, not amend or waive, or 
permit to be amended or waived any provision of thereof. 
 
 
 
Conditions 
 
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
Article IV: Effectiveness 
 
4.01.       The Grant Agreement shall not become effective until evidence 
satisfactory to the World Bank has been furnished to the World Bank that the 
following condition has been fulfilled, namely that the Subsidiary Agreements 
have been executed and delivered, respectively, on behalf of the Recipient and 
South West State of Somalia, and on behalf of the Recipient and the Jubbaland 
State of Somalia, and the pertinent Subsidiary Agreement is legally binding upon 
the Recipient and South West State of Somalia, or upon the Recipient and the 
Jubbaland State of Somalia, in accordance with the terms of such Subsidiary 
Agreement; and  
 
4.02.        As part of the evidence to be furnished pursuant to Section 4.01(a) 
immediately above, there shall be furnished to the World Bank an opinion or 
opinions satisfactory to the World Bank of counsel acceptable to the World Bank 
or, if the World Bank so requests, a certificate satisfactory to the World Bank of a 
competent official of the Recipient, showing the following matters: 
 
(a) 
that on behalf of the Recipient, this Agreement has been duly authorized 
or ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of the Recipient and is 
legally binding upon it in accordance with its terms; and 
 
(b) 
that the pertinent Subsidiary Agreement has been duly authorized or 
ratified by the Recipient and South West State of Somalia, or by the Recipient 
and the Jubbaland State of Somalia, and is legally binding upon the Recipient and 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 34 of 38 
 
South West State, or upon the Recipient and the Jubbaland State of Somalia, in 
accordance with terms of such Subsidiary Agreement.  
 
4.03.  Except as the Recipient and the World Bank shall otherwise agree, date 
on which this Agreement shall enter into effect (Effective Date) shall be the date 
upon which the World Bank dispatches to the Recipient notice of its acceptance 
of the evidence required pursuant to Section 4.01. If, before the Effective Date, 
any event has occurred which would have entitled the World Bank to suspend 
the right of the Recipient to make withdrawals from the Grant Account if this 
Agreement had been effective, the World Bank may postpone the dispatch of 
the notice referred to in this Section until such events have ceased to exist. 
 
4.04.        This Agreement and all obligations of the parties under it shall 
terminate if it has not entered into effect by the date ninety (90) days after the 
date of this Agreement, unless the World Bank, after consideration of the 
reasons for the delay, establishes a later date for the purpose of this Section. The 
World Bank shall promptly notify the Recipient of such later date. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 35 of 38 
 
IX. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING 
 
 
      
 
Results Framework 
COUNTRY: Somalia  
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing 
Project Development Objective(s) 
 
To provide: (i) an assessment of the feasibility of, and preliminary plans for, selected urban investment and institutional strengthening activities in targeted cities, and (ii) 
enhanced project preparation and implementation capacity of participating agencies. 
 
Project Development Objective Indicators by Objectives/ Outcomes 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
DLI 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
Feasibity studies, preliminary and detailed design studies for specific urban investments conducted (Action: This Objective is New) 
Feasibility, preliminary design, and detailed design studies for 
specific urban investments: secondary roads in Kismayo and 
Baidoa (Number)  
0.00 
5.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Institutional assessments of participating agencies conducted (Action: This Objective is New) 
Institutional assessments of participating agencies (Number)  
0.00 
5.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 36 of 38 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
DLI 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
Assessment of Local Development Fund (Number)  
0.00 
1.00 
Action: This indicator has been Marked for Deletion  
Project implementation units established in targeted cities (Action: This Objective is New) 
Project implementation units established in targeted cities 
(Number)  
0.00 
5.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
 
PDO Table SPACE 
 
Intermediate Results Indicators by Components 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
DLI 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
 
Component 1: Technical Studies (Action: This Component is New) 
Contracting for Feasibility Studies and Institutional Assessments 
(Number)  
0.00 
4.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Component 2: Project Implementation Capacity Support (Action: This Component is New) 
Establishment of Project Implementation Units (PIUs) in target 
cities (Number)  
0.00 
5.00 
Action: This indicator is New  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 37 of 38 
 
IO Table SPACE 
  
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators Mapped 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Feasibility, preliminary design, and 
detailed design studies for specific urban 
investments: secondary roads in Kismayo 
and Baidoa 
Number of cities that have 
had technical studies 
conducted for priority 
urban investment. 
Annual 
 
Project 
reports 
 
Regular supervision 
missions and reporting 
from the project. 
 
World Bank 
 
Institutional assessments of participating 
agencies 
Number of cities that have 
had institutional 
assessments conducted. 
Project end 
 
Implementati
on Support 
Missions and 
Project 
reports 
 
Regular reporting 
 
World Bank 
 
Assessment of Local Development Fund 
Reports 
Bank team 
Output of 
project 
 
Over the course of the 
project 
Project implementation units established 
in targeted cities 
Number of project 
implementation units 
established in each city 
Annual 
 
Project 
support 
missions and 
project 
reporting 
 
Regular project reports 
 
World Bank 
 
 
ME PDO Table SPACE 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Urban Investment Planning Project Additional Financing (P166591) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
November 26, 2018 
Page 38 of 38 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators Mapped 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Contracting for Feasibility Studies and 
Institutional Assessments 
Number of contracts 
signed 
Annual 
 
Project 
activity 
 
Regular implementation 
support missions and 
project reports 
 
World Bank 
 
Establishment of Project Implementation 
Units (PIUs) in target cities 
Number of PIUs set up in 
target cities. 
Annual 
 
Project 
reports 
 
Regular implementation 
support missions and 
project monitoring and 
completion report 
 
World Bank 
 
 
ME IO Table SPACE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
