 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD3104  
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT 
ON A 
PROPOSED PRE-ARREARS CLEARANCE GRANT 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 30.4 MILLION 
(US$42.0 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
TO THE 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA  
FOR THE 
WATER FOR AGRO-PASTORAL PRODUCTIVITY AND RESILIENCE 
OR THE “BIYOOLE” PROJECT 
 
June 4, 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Water Global Practice 
Africa Region 
 
 
 
   
This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration. This does not imply a presumed 
outcome. This document may be updated following Board consideration and the updated document will be made 
publicly available in accordance with the Bank’s Policy: Access to Information. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
(Exchange Rate Effective April 30, 2019) 
 
Currency Unit =  Somali Shilling (SSHh) 
SSHh 578 = US$1 
SDR 0.7262568 = 
US$1 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
AMISOM 
African Union Mission in Somalia 
BRCiS 
Building Resilient Communities in Somalia 
CDP 
Community Development Plan 
CERC 
Contingency Emergency Response Component 
CERIP 
Contingent Emergency Response Implementation Plan 
CMU  
Country Management Unit 
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework 
CQS 
Selection Based on the Consultants’ Qualification 
DA 
Designated Account 
DALY 
Disability-adjusted Life Year 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
EIA 
Environmental Impact Assessment 
EIRR 
Economic Internal Rate of Return 
EMP 
Environmental Management Plan 
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
FAO 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 
FRS 
Federal Republic of Somalia 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMIS 
Financial Management Information System 
FMS 
Federal Member States 
FSNAU 
Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit 
GBV 
Gender-based Violence 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GHG 
Greenhouse Gas 
GIS 
Geographic Information System 
GRM 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service 
IDP 
Internally Displaced Person 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
IFI 
International Finance Institution 
INGO 
International Nongovernmental Organization 
IPF 
Investment Project Financing 
IPSAS 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards 
IRM 
Immediate Response Mechanism 
ISA 
International Standards of Auditing 
LIPW 
Labor-intensive Public Works 
MIS 
Management Information System 
MoF 
Ministry of Finance 
MoPIED 
Ministry of Planning Investment and Economic Development 
MPF 
Multi-partner Fund 
MTR 
Midterm Review 
NDP 
National Development Plan 
NGO 
Nongovernmental Organization 
NPV 
Net Present Value 
OHS 
Occupational Health and Safety 
OPM 
Office of the Prime Minister 
PA 
Project Account 
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
PFM 
Public Finance Management 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PLFMIS 
Puntland Financial Management Information System 
PP 
Procurement Plan 
PPA 
Public Procurement, Concessions, and Disposal Act 
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development 
QCBS 
Quality- and Cost-Based Selection 
RFB 
Request for Bid 
RFQ 
Request for Quotation 
RPF 
Resettlement Policy Framework 
RRF 
Recovery and Resilience Framework 
SCD 
Systematic Country Diagnostic 
SDR 
Special Drawing Rights 
SCoA 
Standard Charter of Accounts 
SEA 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
SFMIS 
Somali Financial Management Information System 
SLFMIS 
Somaliland Financial Management Information System 
SoE 
Statement of Expenditure 
SomReP 
Somalia Resilience Program 
SPD 
Standard Procurement Document 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Expenditure in Procurement 
TTL 
Task Team Leader 
UN 
United Nations 
UNDB 
United Nations Development Business 
UNDP 
United Nations Development Programme 
UNICEF 
United Nations Children’s Fund 
US$ 
United States Dollar 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
VDC 
Village Development Committee 
WALP 
Water for Agropastoral Livelihoods Pilot Project 
WAPR 
Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience 
WET 
Wadi Evaluation Tool 
WHO 
World Health Organization 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Regional Vice President: Hafez M. H. Ghanem 
Country Director: Bella Bird 
Senior Global Practice Director: Jennifer J. Sara 
Practice Manager: Catherine Signe Tovey 
Task Team Leaders: Tesfaye Bekalu Wondem, Stephen D'Alessandro 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... 1 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 6 
A. 
Country Context ............................................................................................................................ 6 
B. 
Sectoral and Institutional Context ................................................................................................ 8 
C. 
Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ......................................................................................... 11 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 15 
A. 
Project Development Objectives ................................................................................................ 15 
B. 
Project Components ................................................................................................................... 15 
C. 
Project Cost and Financing .......................................................................................................... 20 
D. 
Direct Project Beneficiaries ......................................................................................................... 22 
E. 
Results Chain ............................................................................................................................... 23 
F. 
Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design ................................................................ 24 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................ 26 
A. 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ....................................................................... 26 
B. 
Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements ..................................................................... 28 
C. 
Sustainability ............................................................................................................................... 29 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 29 
A. 
Economic and Financial Analysis ................................................................................................. 29 
B. 
Technical ..................................................................................................................................... 30 
Greenhouse Gas Accounting .............................................................................................................. 30 
Financial Management ....................................................................................................................... 30 
C. 
Procurement ............................................................................................................................... 31 
D. 
Safeguards ................................................................................................................................... 31 
E. 
Key Risks ...................................................................................................................................... 35 
V. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 40 
ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan .......................................... 46 
ANNEX 2. Economic and Financial Analysis .................................................................... 75 
ANNEX 3. MAP .............................................................................................................. 79 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
  
Page 1 of 79 
 
  
   
DATASHEET 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 
 BASIC INFO TABLE 
Country(ies) 
Project Name 
Somalia 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental Assessment Category 
P167826 
Investment Project 
Financing 
B-Partial Assessment 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component  (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Disbursement-linked Indicators (DLIs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[  ] Conflict  
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
25-Jun-2019 
28-Feb-2023 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
No 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
Develop water and agricultural services among agro-pastoralist communities in dryland areas of Somalia. 
 
Components 
 
Component Name  
Cost (US$, millions) 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 79 
 
Component 1: Support the Development of Multiple Use Water Sources  
  15.00 
 
Component 2. Institutional and Capacity Development  
   6.00 
 
Component 3: Supporting Sustainable Land Management and Livelihoods 
Development Around Water Points  
   9.50 
 
Component 4: Project Management, M & E, Knowledge Management and Learning  
   9.00 
 
 
Organizations 
 
Borrower:  
 Federal Republic of Somalia  
Implementing Agency: 
 Participating States and Somaliland  
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
Total Project Cost 
42.00 
Total Financing 
42.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
42.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILS-NewFinEnh1 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
42.00 
          IDA Grant 
42.00 
 
  
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Guarantee Amount 
Total Amount 
 National PBA 
   0.00 
  42.00 
   0.00 
  42.00 
Total 
   0.00 
  42.00 
   0.00 
  42.00 
 
 
 
Expected Disbursements (in US$, Millions) 
 
WB Fiscal Year   
 
 
 
 
 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 79 
 
Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
   0.83 
   6.90 
   9.92 
  13.72 
  10.63 
Cumulative 
 
 
 
 
 
   0.83 
   7.73 
  17.65 
  31.37 
  42.00 
  
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Water 
Agriculture, Fragile, Conflict & Violence 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
Gender Tag 
Does the project plan to undertake any of the following? 
a. Analysis to identify Project-relevant gaps between males and females, especially in light of 
country gaps identified through SCD and CPF 
Yes 
b. Specific action(s) to address the gender gaps identified in (a) and/or to improve women or 
men's empowerment 
Yes 
c. Include Indicators in results framework to monitor outcomes from actions identified in (b) 
Yes 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
⚫ High 
2. Macroeconomic 
⚫ Substantial 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ Substantial 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ High 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
⚫ High 
6. Fiduciary 
⚫ High 
7. Environment and Social 
⚫ Substantial 
8. Stakeholders 
⚫ Substantial 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 79 
 
9. Other 
⚫ Substantial 
10. Overall 
⚫ High 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?  
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
  
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project 
Yes 
No 
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 
✔ 
   
Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities OP/BP 4.03 
  
✔  
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 
✔ 
   
Forests OP/BP 4.36 
  
✔  
Pest Management OP 4.09 
✔ 
   
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 
✔ 
   
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 
  
✔  
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 
✔ 
   
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 
✔ 
   
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 
✔ 
   
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 
  
✔  
 
Legal Covenants 
  
 Sections and Description 
The Recipient shall not later than two (2) months after the Effective Date, establish, and thereafter maintain, 
throughout the implementation of the Project, an inter-ministerial steering committee (Steering Committee) at the 
federal level with functions, composition and resources satisfactory to the Association. 
 
 
 
 
Conditions 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 79 
 
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
The Recipient has recruited and/or designated a project coordinator and a monitoring and 
evaluation specialist to the National Project Coordination Unit, with experience and under 
terms of reference acceptable to the Association. 
 
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
The Recipient has prepared and adopted a project operation manual, in form and substance 
satisfactory to the Association. 
 
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
A Subsidiary Agreement has been executed on behalf of the Recipient and each Participating 
State and Somaliland in accordance with the provisions of Section I, Part D of Schedule 2 to 
this Agreement, in form and substance satisfactory to the Association. 
 
Type 
Description 
Disbursement 
the Recipient has determined that an Eligible Crisis or Emergency has occurred, has furnished 
to the Association a request to include said activities in the CERC Part in order to respond to 
said Eligible Crisis or Emergency, and the Association has agreed with such determination, 
accepted said request and notified the Recipient thereof; 
 
Type 
Description 
Disbursement 
the Recipient has prepared and disclosed all safeguards instruments required for said 
activities, and the Recipient has implemented any actions which are required to be taken 
under said instruments, all in accordance with the provisions of Section F of Schedule 2 to 
this Agreement; 
 
Type 
Description 
Disbursement 
the Recipient’s Coordinating Authority has adequate staff and resources, in accordance with 
the provisions of Section F of this Schedule 2 to this Agreement, for the purposes of said 
activities; and 
 
Type 
Description 
Disbursement 
the Recipient has adopted a CERC Operations Manual in form, substance and manner 
acceptable to the Association and the provisions of the CERC Operations Manual remain - or 
have been updated in accordance with the provisions of Section C of this Schedule 2 so as to 
be appropriate for the inclusion and implementation of said activities under the CERC Part. 
 
 
     [dd
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 79 
 
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
A. Country Context 
1. 
After more than two decades of insecurity and humanitarian crises, Somalia is establishing the 
foundations for a new political settlement. An Agreement on a Provisional Constitution in 2011 and the 
subsequent establishment of a new Federal Republic of Somalia (FRS) opens a new chapter for Somalia’s 
development and offers hope for a stable future based on a federal model. Since 2011, Al Shabab’s 
territorial footprint has narrowed and the insurgency has mainly resorted to asymmetric attacks focused 
on Mogadishu.  
2. 
New Federal Member States (FMS) have emerged in the past five years, but the federation 
process is complex. State formation is both a significant development opportunity and a contentious 
process. Urban areas in southern Somalia, formerly under Al Shabaab control, are now the capitals of 
newly formed FMS and responsible for subnational administration, including service delivery. While state 
formation provides an opportunity for Somalia’s governance and service delivery, it has also opened new 
uncertainties over representation and power and resource sharing. Meanwhile, Somaliland’s relationship 
with Somalia remains unresolved. 
3. 
Somalia’s economic development challenges are equally daunting, and growth remains 
insufficient for reducing vulnerability for a large segment of the population. Between 2013 and 2017, 
Somali real gross domestic product (GDP) is estimated to have grown at an average of 2.5 percent per 
year while population grew by 2.9 percent per year. The result has been an annual contraction in per 
capita incomes of 0.4 percent during the same period, leaving GDP per capita at just over US$500. Growth 
is mainly consumption driven, enabled by large remittance and aid inflows (US$1.4 billion and US$1.75 
billion respectively in 2017), while construction, telecommunications, and money transfer services have 
been the key growth sectors. The diaspora remittances enable household consumption at 132 percent of 
GDP and represent an important component of income for the bottom 40 percent of households. Half of 
Somalia’s estimated 12 million people live in rural areas, pursuing pastoralist and agro-pastoralist 
livelihoods. The agriculture sector remains the backbone of the economy and accounts for about 75 
percent of GDP among the highest in the world. Livestock alone accounts for about 40 percent of the 
sector’s 79 percent share of export earnings, bringing in over US$500 million a year.  
4. 
Somalia is highly vulnerable to natural disasters, having experienced at least 14 drought events 
since 1960.1 Rural Somalia remains acutely poor and subject to repeated cycles of devastating droughts 
averaging once in every four years. By February 2017, over 6.2 million Somalis needed humanitarian 
assistance. While famine was averted, there were nearly 400,000 cases of acute child malnutrition and an 
additional 1 million people displaced to rapidly expanding urban settlements and camps for internally 
displaced persons (IDPs). Losses in the livestock sector from the 2016/17 drought were estimated at US$2 
billion with herd losses reported at between 40 percent and 60 percent. Just as Somalia was recovering 
from the drought, flooding in the upper Shebelle area during the first half of 2018 displaced over 230,000 
people and affected over 600,000. Between 2006 and 2018, Somalia experienced five major flood events, 
affecting hundreds of thousands of people. Now, in 2019, Somalia is entering another crisis, with gu rains 
failing following abnormally low deyr rains, causing widespread crop failure and accelerated decline in 
                                            
1 Masih, I., S. Maskey, F. E. F. Mussá, and P. Trambauer. 2014. “A Review of Droughts on the African Continent: A Geospatial 
and Long-Term Perspective.” Hydrology and Earth System Science 18: 3635–3649. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 79 
 
livestock productivity. This is likely to result in the numbers of people in crisis and emergency to climb 
back up to 2016/7 levels of around 2.2 million – and humanitarian financing is proving harder to mobilize. 
5. 
Climate change is further exacerbating the situation, intensifying these droughts and floods. The 
Center for Global Development places Somalia at the top of the list of 167 countries for overall 
vulnerability to climate change adjusted for coping capacity.2 In addition to an intensification of droughts 
and floods, increasing variability of between these two extremes is also expected over the coming 
decades. Projections of warming across Africa vary from 0.2C per decade to more than 0.5C per decade. In 
the short term, rainfall is predicted to increase by 7 percent across Eastern Africa. The amount of rainfall 
is less important to farmers than how closely its timing correlates with the planting season and the 
geographic distribution of the rain, and both are expected to become more irregular with climate 
change.3 Moreover, Somalia is projected to experience a nearly 2C increase in maximum daily 
temperatures, which could stress crop productivity thresholds and endanger livestock. Thus, adaptation 
measures to address these increasing risks are at the core of this project and are embedded in the 
technical design of the proposed operation. This project is therefore critical for dampening the impacts of 
climate change by providing improved access to water and strengthening the adaptive capacity and 
livelihood resilience of rural communities to restore elements of their landscapes, thereby reducing the 
frequency and impacts of climate change and extreme weather events. 
6. 
Over half of Somalia’s population lives below the international poverty line.4 Somalia’s under-five 
mortality rate is 137 per 1,000 births. Data on stunting of under-fives is limited with estimates ranging 
widely from 12 percent to 38 percent.5 Three-quarters of the population are under 30 and access to 
education is marred by gender inequality. The adult literacy rate is the lowest in the world, especially 
among women and girls. Primary school enrollment is below 50 percent and less than a tenth of school-
age children attend secondary school. Somalia’s youth bulge, coupled with high rates of unemployment, 
is a major challenge. Over two-thirds of urban households have access to basic water services, but only 
20 percent of rural households do, and less than 10 percent have basic sanitation or hygiene.6 Only about 
one-fifth of the population has access to electricity. 
7. 
The Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD)7 (Report No. 123807-SO), identified the country’s 
‘fragility trap’ as two interconnected cycles: a short-term cycle of fiscal governance political turbulence 
and a longer-term cycle of natural disaster displacement vulnerability. The SCD applied a wealth 
accounting framework, bringing to light the depletion of assets, particularly natural capital, which creates 
vulnerability to shocks. The framework first assessed the stocks of various natural capital assets such as 
land, forests, fish, and minerals; productive assets such as buildings, machinery, infrastructure (highways 
                                            
2 The survey ranks countries across four dimensions of climate impact: extreme weather, sea-level Rise, agricultural 
productivity loss, and overall. Rankings are based on a comprehensive dataset described in a new working paper “Quantifying 
Vulnerability to Climate Change: Implications for Adaptation Assistance,” by the Center for Global Development (CGD) senior 
fellow, David Wheeler, and can be accessed at http://www.cgdev.org/page/mapping-impacts-climate-change. 
3 Stimson. 2011. Climate Change and Famine in Somalia. (https://www.stimson.org/content/climate-change-and-famine-
somalia) 
4 Poverty is estimated using the international US$1.90 2011 purchasing power parity (PPP) poverty line.  
5 Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit (FSNAU) report 12 percent post Deyr 2015/16 while the 2006 Multiple Indicator 
Cluster Survey (MICS) reports 38 percent. 
6 United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)/World Health Organization (WHO) Joint Monitoring Program 
https://washdata.org/data#!/som.  
7 Somalia - Systematic Country Diagnostic; http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en.  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 79 
 
and ports and electricity generation); human assets (population, education, and health); and various 
forms of intangible capital; and then defined the process of development as one of accumulating a 
diversified portfolio of national wealth.  
8. 
Breaking out of this fragility trap will require the country to sustain the reform and growth of 
public institutions that can win peoples’ trust through transparency and fair delivery of basic services and 
that broaden economic opportunities, especially to the young. However, with a tax base of just 2 percent 
of GDP8 and only a nascent civil service, the reform and growth of public institutions capable of 
overcoming this fragility trap will need to focus investment across a carefully selected range of public 
functions that enable, rather than displace private, civic, and community institutions. 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
9. 
Roughly half of the Somali population lives in rural areas and derives their livelihoods from animal 
herding and crop cultivation. As set out in the 2018 Country Economic Memorandum,9 the livestock and 
crop subsectors remain critical to economic recovery and long-term development. Despite the challenges 
of the past three decades, the livestock and crop subsectors remain the main sources of economic activity, 
employment, and exports. Half of the rural population pursues nomadic pastoralist livelihoods, while the 
other half pursues agro-pastoral livelihoods comprising a mix of settled crop production and livestock 
rearing.  
10. 
Somalia faces declining agriculture production and a widening gap between food production and 
consumption, estimated at more than 2 metric tons per hectare. The country’s crop production depends 
on an increasingly narrow and fragile natural resource base and an arid and semiarid climate that has 
become drier, more extreme, and more variable in recent decades due to climate change. Widespread 
environmental degradation, fueled by, among other factors, the breakdown of traditional pastoral and 
clan-based land management systems, demographic pressures, and the unsustainable exploitation of 
groundwater, rangelands, and forests, threatens traditional livelihoods systems and the country’s food 
security. Domestic cereal output, averaging about 265,000 tons a year, has declined nearly 60 percent 
from its 1989 peak and provides less than one-quarter, on average, of per capita cereal needs. Declining 
crop production has fueled a large increase in agricultural imports, including food aid, reaching US$1.5 
billion in 2015, up from US$82 million in the late 1980s. Even before the 2016/17 drought, food aid and 
food imports were already larger than domestic production of grains.  
11. 
Somalia’s livestock sector has rebounded markedly, but considerable downside risks remain. 
Substantial investments have been made by the diaspora, Saudi-controlled companies, and some donors. 
They have resulted in impressive export growth and fueled a dramatic expansion in livestock’s relative 
economic importance. After roughly a tenfold increase in live animal exports in recent decades, the 
subsector today accounts for an estimated 79 percent of total export earnings and is the largest source of 
foreign exchange after remittances. In 2015, Somalia exported a record 5.3 million head of livestock to 
Gulf markets, worth an estimated US$533 million. The 2017 drought in the country had a devastating 
effect on the livestock subsector; the volume of live animal exports declined by 75 percent, from 5.3 
million animals in 2015 to 1.3 million in 2017. In addition, production constraints related to nutrition, 
                                            
8 Compared to 15 percent to 20 percent of GDP across other low-income countries. 
9 World Bank, and FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2018. Rebuilding Resilient and Sustainable Agriculture in Somalia: 
Volume 1 - Main Report (English). http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/781281522164647812/pdf/124651-REVISED-
Somalia-CEM-Agriculture-Report-Main-Report-Revised-July-2018.pdf. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 79 
 
disease, genetic resources, and poor resource management are compounded by structural and 
institutional weaknesses that impede value addition and amplify exposure to climate and other shocks. 
This is best evidenced by an estimated 50 percent drop in live animal exports linked to Saudi Arabia’s 
import ban during 2017 and US$2 billion in livestock damages and losses during the 2016/17 drought 
period (due to a combination of lack of water and pasture).10 Recurring export bans due to alleged disease 
outbreaks not only dampen critical foreign exchange earnings, but also impede sector diversification and 
growth.  
12. 
Revitalizing crop production and making livestock systems more resilient to shocks requires 
overcoming foundational issues of water and environmental management. Most of Somalia is arid or 
semiarid with mean annual rainfall of 200–300 mm per year and high inter-annual and spatial rainfall 
variability. Two permanent rivers, the Shebelle and the Juba, flow from Ethiopia into southern Somalia. 
Both river basins provide much-needed surface and groundwater for irrigation and to sustain fertile 
alluvial flood plains covering an area 174,600 km2. Before the Central Government collapsed in 1990, over 
220,000 ha along the flood plains in the middle and lower reaches of the Juba and Shebelle Rivers, were 
under either controlled irrigation or flood recession farming. Today, much of the irrigation infrastructure 
remains in disrepair with only 100,000 ha under cultivation.11  
13. 
In many African countries, groundwater sources from boreholes provide water for domestic use, 
livestock, and irrigation. In Somalia, however, groundwater sources are technically demanding to identify 
and exploit because aquifers are deep (more than half the boreholes are over 130 m deep with some over 
400 m) and water within aquifers is often of low quality (salty or hard), which makes it unsuitable as 
drinking water or for irrigation.12 Costs for drilling and equipping these deep boreholes are high, ranging 
between US$0.5 million and US$1 million due to a combination of physical, market, and security 
conditions.13 In 2014, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) mapped 3,700 
water points across the country. Only 2,200 were functional and perennial under normal non-drought 
conditions. Of these, only around 500, mainly deep borehole groundwater sources, were improved 
sources.  
14. 
While boreholes can play an important role in ensuring water security for people, they are 
associated with environmental degradation. The yield of groundwater-fed boreholes is less vulnerable to 
short-term fluctuation in rainfall than other sources such as berkads, open dams, shallow hand-dug wells, 
and springs. This makes boreholes an important source of water in times of severe drought especially for 
humanitarian response and particularly in non-riverine regions of Somalia. However, heightened 
pressures on pasture around these boreholes during drought events can cause long-term damage to the 
surrounding rangeland, creating so-called ‘sacrifice zones’. Deep boreholes are also not a good solution 
for increasing agricultural productivity because their operation and maintenance costs are much higher 
than from shallow water sources and challenges related to water quality (for example, high salinity).  
15. 
Based on recent experience, opportunities exist to enhance rural communities’ access to water 
across Somalia’s dry lands by deploying low-cost, small-scale water harvesting and storage technologies 
                                            
10 Federal Republic of Somalia. 2017. Somalia Drought Impact and Needs Assessment: Synthesis Report. 
11 The area currently under irrigation is roughly 50–61 percent of what it was prewar. Just before the collapse of the 
Government, the Somali Ministry of Agriculture estimated that 112,950 ha were under controlled irrigation and 110,000 ha 
were under flood-recession irrigation for a total irrigated area of 222,950 ha. 
12 FAO Somalia Water and Land Information Management (SWALIM). http://fmt.faoso.net/imms/fmt/maps/website/227. 
13 UNICEF Somalia, personal communication.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 79 
 
and without exacerbating conflict (see Box 1). Rivers in northern Somalia, and in areas other than the Juba 
and Shebelle Valleys, are ephemeral with water flowing for very short periods during the seasonal rains. 
Following seasonal rains, water infiltrates into shallow aquifers that last for only a few months of the year. 
Around these shallow aquifers, there is a small but growing horticultural production base selling 
vegetables to urban areas and improving rural incomes. Pilot projects in Puntland and Somaliland, 
including the World Bank-financed Water for Agropastoral Livelihoods Pilot Project (WALP, P152024), 
have demonstrated that water harvesting and storage in these dry lands can be increased through 
investment in small dams such as sand dams, subsurface dams, and infiltration galleries.14 Sand dams, in 
particular, are experiencing a renewed interest because of their relative simplicity and their potential in 
enhancing the resilience of marginal dry-land environments. Studying the impacts of sand dams in Kenya 
on vegetation biomass, Ryan and Elsner (2016) concluded that sand dams hold strong scope to improve 
the adaptive capacity of dry lands by helping sustain vegetation biomass during drought periods.15 
Increased water availability supported by improved vegetation biomass and soil management means 
better potential to support agricultural activities and food production, and thus increased resilience to 
climate change and other risks. 
Box 1. Addressing Conflict Risks and the Needs of Nomadic Pastoralists 
In Somalia, as elsewhere in the Horn of Africa, localized conflicts between farmers and herders, and between 
different pastoralist groups, frequently revolve around issues of contested land use, grazing rights, and insecure 
access to water and pasture. Scarce and under increasing pressure, these resources must be shared with rural 
farming communities and the needs of growing urban centers. Expansion in recent decades of private enclosures 
on traditionally open communal rangelands, especially along livestock migration routes, increasingly jeopardizes 
the mobility of pastoralist communities, thereby weakening their capacity to cope with adverse climate 
conditions. Existing tensions and conflict risks are amplified during extended dry periods—the frequency and 
intensity of which have increased in recent decades—when pastoralist livelihoods become particularly 
precarious. In the absence of provisions to assist pastoralists to safeguard their capital stock during emergencies 
and otherwise recover from the shock, resulting economic insecurity and deprivation increases the risk of wider 
violence and social breakdown. Moreover, political and socioeconomic marginalization of pastoralist 
communities and policies that either neglect or undermine traditional governance and arbitration mechanisms 
have, over time, weakened resource management and conflict resolution capacities among rural communities.  
The World Bank is well positioned to support the FRS in delivering services to rural communities in Somalia’s 
marginalized dry-land areas. The current project design emphasizes a learn-by-doing approach to generate new 
understanding about (a) the current dynamics of nomadic pastoralist systems in Somalia; (b) the specific needs 
of pastoral communities, and their relationships with other livelihood groups including landed farming and agro-
pastoralists communities; (c) reforms of regulations and land tenure rights relating to access to pasture land and 
water for communities, especially nomadic pastoralists; and (d) mechanisms needed to ensure emergency access 
for pastoralists to water and pasture and fodder during droughts. These lessons will inform downstream 
interventions designed to mitigate drivers of vulnerability and conflict, build trust within communities, and 
strengthen resilience. The project will also look to strengthen participation of pastoralists in consultative and 
decision-making processes and to support customary approaches and traditional governance systems for 
managing competition over natural resources and conflict resolution. 
 
                                            
14 These technologies protect water from high evapotranspiration rates by holding the water in shallow sand aquifers that can 
be used to supply limited amounts of water for domestic, livestock, and agricultural uses. 
15 Ryan C., and P. Elsner. 2016. “The Potential for Sand Dams to Increase the Adaptive Capacity of East African Drylands to 
Climate Change.” Regional Environmental Change 16 (7): 2087–2096. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 79 
 
 
16. 
Reestablishing a rationalized public sector role in agriculture will help reintegrate markets for 
private goods with support for public goods and extend the reach of services across the country. Over the 
past decade, the private sector has moved in to fill service delivery gaps, with increasing diaspora 
investments16 taking advantage of Somalia’s lack of restrictions on capital transfers and low barriers to 
market entry. Commercial suppliers are stepping in to market new seed varieties and agrochemicals, while 
networks of private veterinary associations provide animal health services. This has spurred the regrowth 
of agricultural knowledge and innovation systems for private goods where there is favorable access to 
urban markets (for example, for veterinary drugs, improved seeds, and fertilizers). While much aid has 
also been channeled to public goods and knowledge (for example, climate-smart land management 
technologies to improve soil, water, and rangelands management) through the United Nations (UN) and 
civil society organizations to more remote areas, this has largely bypassed nascent public sector 
institutions. Reintroducing a core public sector role in agricultural innovation systems is essential to 
helping traditional rural livelihoods recover and become more resilient to climate change.  
17. 
Following the February 2017 Presidential election, the FRS is better positioned to coherently 
address the numerous challenges associated with rural development. Somalia's National Development 
Plan (NDP), the first in more than 30 years, set out the country's priorities for national recovery and 
development for 2017–2019. The plan sets ambitious targets for peacebuilding, state building, and the 
Sustainable Development Goals structured around nine pillars across the humanitarian-development-
peace continuum. Agricultural development improved natural resource management, and upgrades to 
infrastructure (water and roads) are top priorities to boost economic growth, help cement peace and 
security, alleviate poverty and malnutrition, and enhance health and nutrition outcomes in both rural and 
urban areas. Investment in rural development is also expected to strengthen the resilience of 
communities against internal and external shocks, such as climate change and conflict. These objectives 
are also aligned with the recently completed Recovery and Resilience Framework (RRF) developed 
following the 2016/17 drought.  
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives  
18. 
The Country Partnership Framework (CPF, Report No. 124734-SO), was approved by the World 
Bank’s Board of Executive Directors in September 2018 and covers the period 2019–2022. The CPF is based 
on the priorities of the current NDP and the priority sector plans such as the Public Financial Management 
(PFM) Action Plan, the Financial Sector Roadmap, the Education Sector Strategic Plan, the Drought Impact 
Needs Assessment, and the follow-up RRF. In addition, Somaliland also has a bespoke NDP 2017–2021. 
The activities selected in the CPF were based on the three filters: (a) building on the World Bank Group 
comparative advantage in Somalia; (b) addressing conflict drivers; and (c) managing access and security. 
Investing in water infrastructure, environmental management, and agricultural innovation to diversify and 
strengthen resilience of dry-land rural communities were specifically integrated into the CPF (Objective 
2.4) under its second area of focus which aims at restoring economic resilience and opportunities. 
19. 
With its debt arrears outstanding, Somalia is ineligible for assistance from IDA and other 
                                            
16 A 2014 survey highlighted that more than 50 percent of sector investments by the Somali diaspora were directed to 
agriculture. See Benson, Jay B., Lindsay L. Heger, Lee C. Sorensen, and Alexandria E. Wise. 2014. Somalia Diaspora Investments 
Survey Report: Typologies, Drivers, and Recommendations. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 79 
 
international finance institutions (IFIs) but the World Bank Group’s re-engagement in 2012 funded by the 
Multi-partner Fund (MPF) has helped stabilize institutions and initiate IFI normalization. With support of 
eight key donors, the MPF has enabled the World Bank Group to strengthen federal institutions and 
establish basic economic regulatory foundations. The MPF will remain the core financing vehicle for the 
CPF but is complemented in FY19 by IDA Pre-Arrears Clearance grants of US$140 million targeting 
acceleration of Decision Point under the Heavily-Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) Initiative as well as 
immediate country needs. Provided its reform momentum continues, the Decision Point is feasible within 
the CPF period, allowing Somalia access to concessional resources from IDA and other IFIs, together with 
investment of private capital from the International Finance Corporation (IFC). 
20. 
The World Bank is a relative newcomer in a crowded development field in Somalia, but brings 
comparative advantages in supporting institution building, on-budget financing, and in the market/state 
interface. At present, the World Bank portfolio represents approximately 8 percent of Somalia’s total 
official development assistance). Other donors including U. K. Department of International Development, 
European Union, German Agency for International Development (Gesellschaft für Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit, KfW), Norway, Sweden, and the United States are playing a major role in financing rural 
community-based resilience either through joint UN programs or directly implemented by 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) or private sector contractors. The protracted humanitarian 
situation and limited use of country systems has led to a fragmented aid environment, which unless 
managed, will continue to undermine the capacity of national institutions and state-building initiatives. 
Relative to the other main actors, the World Bank’s comparative advantage in Somalia has been to 
strengthen institutions at the national and subnational level, through the establishment of clear norms 
and standards. The World Bank therefore takes the lead in capacity building of government institutions, 
mainly focused on the public finance and civil service functions but also extending to regulation in key 
economic sectors, including financial services, energy, and telecom. By channeling funds through 
government systems, the World Bank introduces fiduciary, social, and environmental standards in the 
Government around which new practices and capacities can form. Until now, the World Bank has 
channeled more than US$100 million through these country systems. The modalities used allow the World 
Bank to play a strong convening role both for national and international actors. The World Bank finances 
and supports an annual Aid Flow analysis by the Aid Coordination Unit of the Government, which allows 
increased visibility on who is doing what and where. The World Bank has also facilitated dialogue between 
public and private sectors. 
21. 
The proposed grant will scale up water delivery in the arid northern regions while incrementally 
expanding geographically into states in the south of Somalia. This national program of water resource 
development will build capacity of the nascent FMS and rural communities in the south to plan, deliver, 
and sustainably manage water infrastructure for improved livelihoods. The menu of water resource 
development options will be expanded from small dams to include technologies appropriate for 
developing groundwater resources. Emerging lessons from the project and other interventions supporting 
resilient rural livelihoods emphasize the need to also strengthen community-led watershed management 
and promote the uptake of productivity-enhancing technologies and practices. Thus, the new project will 
also finance community planning, mobilization activities, and the delivery of livelihood support services. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 79 
 
Box 2. Drawing Lessons from WALP 
As the first World Bank-financed rural infrastructure project in Somalia in more than 20 years, WALP was 
intended to be a first step in a longer journey of World Bank reengagement in rural livelihoods support in 
Somalia. As a pilot project funded by the World Bank’s State and Peacebuilding Fund, WALP was designed to 
generate lessons in a learning-by-doing approach on how best to intervene on a local level in improving rural 
supply services, how interventions have an impact on local communities, and how best to equip government 
agencies (ministries and departments) with the tools and knowledge to lead the process in the future. The 
project was relatively short (2.5 years) and modest (US$2 million), meant to tread lightly in the provision of water 
services to marginalized communities with uncertain access and often facing acute water scarcity. 
Though not all objectives were achieved, there is strong recognition that WALP constitutes a leap forward in the 
World Bank’s experience and knowledge base about how to implement sustainable, small-scale water 
interventions in a fragile state context. The project successfully delivered eight water points in Somaliland and 
Puntland, including seven dams and one berkad, which are now providing an estimated 42,000 people (and more 
than 200,000 animals) with an improved, reliable water source for human consumption, livestock watering, 
small-scale vegetable gardening, agroforestry, and other uses. Further, the project was successfully 
implemented by government civil servants—seconded from ministries responsible for water, agriculture, 
livestock, and the environment who managed all fiduciary, procurement, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
aspects.  
The WALP experience has generated some important lessons that have directly informed the design of the 
current scale-up project. WALP has demonstrated the suitability of small-scale dam technology in delivering 
critical water resources to communities in dry-land areas and the feasibility and critical importance of 
channelling aid for infrastructure through core country systems and private sector capacity, even in fragile states. 
This approach was both a fundamental principle driving the project’s approach and critical element for 
enhancing institutional capacity as a means of ensuring the sustainability of investments. WALP also 
demonstrated that while enhancing access to water is an essential ingredient in addressing acute vulnerability 
among dry-land communities, these investments are insufficient on their own and need to be complemented by 
parallel investments designed to restore a more healthy ecosystem and to strengthen the capacity of local 
communities to sustainably and equitably manage their water assets and the natural resource base (that is, soils, 
pastureland, and forests) that underpins their livelihoods. While formidable knowledge gaps remain, the WALP 
experience has also generated a wealth of new understanding about social dynamics among marginalized 
livelihood groups (landed farmer, agro-pastoralists, and pastoralists) living in Somalia’s dry lands and the 
socioeconomic drivers of resource-based conflict, which will help inform and guide downstream interventions 
that are community-driven, equitable across interest groups, and conflict-sensitive. 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 79 
 
 
 
 
Source: WALP Project  
Implementation Unit - Puntland 
 
22. 
The proposed operation Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (WAPR), or 
“Biyoole”,17 contributes to a range of higher-level objectives, consistent with the World Bank’s twin goals 
of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity. Improving access to multiple-use water 
resources (for human consumption, livestock, and small-scale irrigation) in a dry-land environment can 
significantly improve human health and well-being. It reduces the effects of poverty by building 
community resilience to climate-induced risks and the associated vulnerabilities that disproportionately 
affect the poor. The project will reduce the risks and impacts of floods and droughts in the targeted areas, 
thereby enhancing the resilience of target communities to these threats, which are exacerbated by 
climate change. Improved resilience and self-reliance, in turn, will contribute to reducing poverty. The 
project will support income generation through sustainable livelihoods for vulnerable people and 
catalyzing economic growth in rural areas. Enhanced water access among target communities will support 
domestic use and livestock watering (and improved health outcomes), small-scale irrigation, and 
environmental services. By promoting more sustainable use of natural resources, the project will also help 
improve the availability of water for longer periods, thereby reducing water-related displacement and 
attenuating the drivers of resources-based conflicts. 
23. 
Learning by doing. Biyoole is part of a multiyear programmatic approach with a potential to scale 
up horizontally to cover more areas of the country and vertically to deepen and diversify the infrastructure 
and livelihoods support. Building from the WALP experience and lessons learned (see Box 2), the initial 
focus of Biyoole is to strengthen resilience in the northern and central parts of Somalia that are more 
frequently affected by drought and are expected to be increasingly so in the future with climate change. 
As implementation experience is gained and criteria for participation are met by other states, the goal is 
to incrementally and sequentially scale up the project to improve rural resilience in all six states of 
Somalia. This will depend on the availability of resources, readiness to engage (including institutional 
capacity, financial management (FM), and coordination functions for example), and the security 
environment. This project will scale up the activities under WALP in Puntland and Somaliland while 
starting with new pilots in the states of Galmudug and South West. The learn-by-doing approach and 
experience gained will accommodate future phases to include Hirshabelle and Jubbaland. Scale-up plans 
for all FMS and Somaliland will be considered during the midterm evaluation of the project. 
                                            
17 ‘Biyoole’ means ‘water fetcher’ in Somalia. It is the person who collects water from shallow wells, water catchments, and 
other sources to distribute for household consumption, livestock, and agriculture. The biyoole is a staple of Somali agricultural 
and pastoral life. The FRS considers that, it is an easy brand to communicate with Somali audiences and easily pronounceable 
by non-Somali speakers. Biyoole is a difficult brand to hijack and, of course, includes the word 'water' in it. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 79 
 
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
A. Project Development Objectives 
24. 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to develop water and agricultural services 
among agro-pastoralist communities in dry-land areas of Somalia. 
25. 
Achievement of the proposed PDO will be measured using the following three outcome 
indicators: (a) People provided with access to improved water sources under the project, of which 50 
percent are female (number); (b) Farmers/clients (number) adopting improved technology, share of which 
are female (percent); and (c) Target beneficiaries satisfied with project investments (percentage). The 
project outcome (PDO-level) and intermediate indicators are presented in the Results Framework (Part 
V). 
B. Project Components 
26. 
The proposed WAPR focuses primarily on (a) improving access to multiple-use water resources 
(for human consumption, livestock, small-scale irrigation, and environmental services) in dry lands of 
Somalia; (b) increasing the land area under sustainable landscape management practices; (c) reaching 
targeted beneficiaries with agricultural services; and (d) promoting the uptake of productivity enhancing 
innovations among target rural communities. Importantly, the integrating focus of all of these 
components is the fundamental emphasis on strengthening the adaptive capacity of rural communities in 
Somalia and their resilience to the impacts of climate change. 
27. 
Component 1: Support the Development of Multiple Use Water Sources (US$15 million 
equivalent IDA). Based on detailed basin-level hydrology assessments, micro-watershed action plans, and 
groundwater investigations, this component will finance investments in key water management 
infrastructure for harvesting, storing, and delivering water for people, livestock, and agriculture. The 
infrastructure will be designed to deliver both improved human health outcomes and water for productive 
uses (mainly agricultural production and agroforestry services for landscape restoration), thereby making 
the targeted communities more resilient to droughts and floods (restored landscapes suffer less from 
erosion and are thus more resilient to flooding).  
28. 
Subcomponent 1.1: Construction of New Community Water Points (US$11.5 million IDA). This 
subcomponent will support the rehabilitation of existing water infrastructure and small works. The menu 
of water infrastructure investments will include small sand and subsurface dams in dry river beds (wadis), 
surface water storage infrastructure (for example, berkads and hafir dams), area infiltration interventions 
such as semicircular bunds or soil bunds, and rock catchments. As explained above, sand dams are 
particularly effective at enhancing the resilience of marginal dry-land environments by helping sustain 
vegetation biomass during drought periods. The improved vegetation biomass and soil management, 
combined with the increased water availability derived from these various infrastructure investments, will 
facilitate agricultural activities and food production. These will, in turn, increase the targeted 
communities’ resilience to droughts and floods. Solar units will lift water and then use gravity to feed 
auxiliary structures such as cattle troughs, water points for human use, and so on (Annex 1 describes these 
technologies). In addition, if no other options are feasible, the component will support construction of 
boreholes for groundwater extraction. Boreholes are an important source of water during severe drought, 
especially for humanitarian response, and particularly in non-riverine regions of Somalia.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 79 
 
29. 
Subcomponent 1.2: Rehabilitation of Community Water Points (US$3.5 million IDA). This 
subcomponent will finance the rehabilitation of existing water infrastructure and small prioritizing 
boreholes. The subcomponent will also finance associated infrastructure to provide multiple-use water 
services (zero-emission standpipes or shallow wells with hand or solar pumps and watering troughs for 
livestock). Selected project sites can include multiple interventions to ensure adequate water through 
periods of drought and for multiple purposes: high-quality water for domestic use and moderate quality 
for livestock and agricultural uses. These investments will be the anchor assets around which other project 
activities in each selected sub-catchment will seek to capitalize and manage. The diversification of water 
sources based on the Wadi Evaluation Tool (WET), extensive ground truthing, and groundwater 
assessment will increase the supply of water and therefore mitigate the risk of droughts and climate 
change. 
30. 
Component 2: Institutional and Capacity Development (US$6 million equivalent IDA). As 
Somalia consolidates its political transition and builds on the resulting peace and security dividends, there 
is a strong need to support the FRS and the FMS to develop the knowledge systems and institutions 
needed to deliver essential services and optimize use of the country’s natural resources. This component 
will help build a strong foundation for a gradual transition to more integrated and sustainable agriculture 
and water development—promoting the farmers’ adoption of drought-resistant seed varieties and 
climate-smart technologies—by strengthening local, state, and national institutions and capacities. 
Promoting water and agriculture in an integrated and sustainable way based on carefully managed water 
infrastructure and allocation of water and selection of the most efficient technologies (from a water 
conservation standpoint) will make the project beneficiary communities more resilient to droughts and 
floods. The component objectives will be delivered through two subcomponents. 
31. 
Subcomponent 2.1. National and state Institutional capacity Building (US$2.0 million IDA). This 
subcomponent will support strengthening of national and state institutions capacities to plan, implement, 
and monitor integrated agriculture and water development programs. The Government needs to develop 
better sector oversight to coordinate external interventions with its own nascent program of domestic 
investment. The Government needs to establish the policies and laws to regulate the sector and ensure 
that infrastructure investment is sustainable. This includes developing and implementing construction 
standards; rangeland management guidelines; key feasibility studies for preparing project interventions 
(site-specific Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs), engineering surveys, and hydrological 
assessments for project areas); and providing improved extension to farmers and pastoralists; 
management models; and cost recovery mechanisms – all aimed at helping the beneficiaries better deal 
with the increasing risk of droughts and floods. Better data are also needed to improve knowledge of 
hydrogeology and groundwater exploration so that aquifer recharge can be optimized, thus further 
contributing to water security and climate risk reduction. Without improved data, both external and 
domestic infrastructure investment will continue to be ad hoc and poorly coordinated. 
32. 
To be able to leverage existing expertise, ground presence, and local knowledge, this component 
will finance a technical assistance agency (for example, FAO, NGO, university, and technical team) to 
support national and state government agencies in selecting, training, and monitoring nonstate actors for 
local project implementation. It will also support research and the development of a training needs 
assessment for relevant government agencies, development of curricula, and delivery of high-value 
training programs. It will also finance highly targeted exposure visits to neighboring countries to learn 
from best-practice approaches. This component will also support peer to peer knowledge exchange and 
sharing of experiences. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 79 
 
33. 
Subcomponent 2.2. Community Development and Demand Mobilization (US$4.0 million IDA). 
Drawing on lessons from WALP, this subcomponent will finance a holistic community engagement 
approach that will support activities in Components 1 and 3 through a continuing dialogue about the 
community’s development needs, the resources they have, their priorities for managing them, and how 
to ensure equitable access. The state-level Project Implementation Units (PIUs) will be responsible for the 
mobilization process. Given human resource constraints, the PIUs will leverage project funds to contract 
technical assistance for community mobilization and planning activities. The PIUs and FMS ministry staff 
will work on teams with the mobilization contractor to transfer knowledge of mobilization theory and 
techniques among government staff and to add technical knowledge into dialogue with communities. 
Mobilization will broadly (a) increase awareness of the ‘rules of the game’ for participation in the project; 
(b) introduce the costs and benefits of different technologies to promote informed demand and increase 
community ownership and sustainable management of infrastructure and other investments; (c) enhance 
the capacity for community governance by training leaders on meeting management, ensuring inclusion 
and participation, conflict resolution, and so on; (d) increase awareness of the resource constraints within 
the community and considerations of equitable resource management across different stakeholder 
groups; and (e) develop community livelihood development plans to identify priority needs that can be 
met by collective action, specific project interventions, or leveraging other programs. Anchored by a 
robust and inclusive consultative process, community mobilization activities will serve to inform the 
team’s evolving understanding of the risk landscape and, thereby, will help to ensure that project 
interventions are conflict-sensitive and well aligned with project safeguards. The proposed planning 
process embeds project exits from the beginning and focuses on building community cohesion, self-
reliance, and resilience to droughts and floods after the project closes, as explained in the next paragraph.  
34. 
In existing WALP sites, mobilization will begin immediately to help communities develop a water 
budget based on ongoing water monitoring activities, water-use priorities, and how to maximize local 
water resources in the most inclusive way possible. The activity will produce a plan for management of 
the water infrastructure, including upkeep and maintenance, and for sustainable and equitable allocation 
and access across stakeholder groups. In addition, it will produce a plan for productive livelihood 
development with priority investments in land management, cropping, and livestock to be supported by 
the project. New project sites will begin mobilization once the technical specifications for site selection 
have been finalized and project communities have been identified. In these communities, in addition to 
the activities above, the mobilization will help communities select the optimal technology to be financed 
by the project to increase water capture and storage (for example, sand dams, berkhads, and so on). 
Technical support for the implementation of livelihood development priorities will be provided through 
separate contracts to technical service providers issued and managed by each state PIU.  
35. 
Component 3. Supporting Sustainable Land Management and Livelihoods Development Around 
Water Points (US$9.5 million equivalent IDA). Linking with water infrastructure and community planning 
and mobilization interventions under Components 1 and 2, this component will catalyze priority 
investments, facilitated by participating FMS line ministries, to create and strengthen productive 
livelihoods among target communities. The component will stimulate the growth and development of 
productive and sustainable income-generating activities through two subcomponents that will (a) 
improve the health and sustainability of the natural resource base (that is, land, water, and vegetative 
cover), which underpins all agriculture and pastoralist livelihoods and (b) facilitate communities’ access 
to productive assets and extension services needed for agriculture and livestock production.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 79 
 
36. 
Component 3 activities will be piloted during Year 1 within existing WALP sites where water assets 
were installed and Community Development Plans (CDPs) developed during the pilot phase. Pilot activities 
will initially look to build on the experience of FAO and NGO consortia, for example, SomReP18 and BRCiS,19 
and local NGOs with investments designed to facilitate post-crisis recovery of rural households and 
livelihoods while building stronger resilience to future climate-related shocks, primarily droughts and 
floods. The experience gained, and lessons learned from the existing WALP sites will inform the 
introduction and scale-up of validated approaches during Years 2–5 with target communities elsewhere 
as CDPs are developed and water assets are delivered. The component will finance, among others, 
services delivery contracts; field travel per diems; labor-intensive landscape interventions (through cash-
for-work); and the purchase and distribution of assets (seeds, tools, irrigation, and other equipment) 
needed for cropping and livestock activities.  
37. 
Subcomponent 3.1: Integrated Landscape Management (US$3.5 million IDA). Based on priorities 
from the community planning and using a micro-watershed approach, this subcomponent will finance 
through cash-for-work community-led soil and water conservation measures. These include landscape 
rehabilitation and protection through terracing of irrigable land degraded or endangered by erosion, gully 
rehabilitation, planting of trees and other vegetation in upland areas, rangeland management to 
introduce rotational grazing and stocking rate limits, and improved management and sustainable use of 
existing forest and vegetation resources. Together, these activities will encourage better infiltration of 
water during the rainy season into the surrounding land and reduce loss of valuable topsoil from surface 
runoff, all contributing to the restoration and management of a healthier ecosystem, one that can more 
sustainably support rural communities and increase their adaptive capacity to better cope with floods and 
droughts. This subcomponent would also promote the uptake of alternative energy solutions through 
awareness building, demonstrations, and financing to curtail local demand for environmentally 
destructive and unsustainable charcoal production. The subcomponent would also finance establishment 
of community tree orchards for sustainable fuelwood and charcoal production and would support the 
promotion and take-up of small-scale solar energy solutions for household use.  
38. 
Subcomponent 3.2: Agriculture and Livestock Support (US$6 million IDA). Anchored by the 
water assets delivered under Component 1 and guided by the CDPs developed under Component 2, this 
subcomponent will support the development and diversification of livelihoods among target 
communities. It will facilitate the demand-driven delivery of agricultural assets and extension services 
based on community-specific priorities and context-specific conditions, including estimates of water 
availability and water-use demand. Activities envisioned under this subcomponent include the 
establishment of community gardens and fruit tree groves (as demonstration plots); procurement and 
distribution of improved seeds and other inputs; and introduction of high-efficiency micro-irrigation 
systems, soil micronutrient assessments, and needed training. These investments will help communities 
increase their production of more nutritious food for household consumption and, where possible, 
marketable surpluses. Training would focus on promoting farmer adoption of climate-smart farming 
                                            
18 Founded in 2011, the Somalia Resilience Program (SomReP), consortia of seven International NGOs (INGOs) (ACF, ADRA, 
CARE, COOPI, DRC, Oxfam, and World Vision), implements several projects across Somalia aimed at enhancing the resilience of 
vulnerable communities through community participatory planning, the use of financial instruments such as savings groups and 
the management of rangelands and ecosystem health. 
19 With an objective to “Improve the resilience of rural communities and IDP households in Somalia,” the BRCiS Consortium, or 
"Building Resilient Communities in Somalia,” comprises Cesvi, Concern Worldwide, Norwegian Refugee Council (lead agency), 
International Rescue Committee, and Save the Children and currently operates in 22 districts of the southern and central 
regions of Somalia. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 79 
 
techniques that can improve household food and nutrition security while optimizing usage efficiency of 
available water resources. Beyond soil and water conservation, training would focus on promoting 
adoption of drought-resistance crops and seed, intercropping and crop diversification, integrated pest 
management, fodder production and storage, animal health treatment, and household kitchen gardens 
using harvested rainwater. These training activities (and other activities provided through this 
subcomponent) will increase the beneficiaries’ resilience to floods (through soil conservation) and 
droughts (through the remaining activities). Component activities will be overseen by technical line 
ministries and delivered through service provider contracts (that is, NGOs and UN agencies). 
39. 
Component 4: Project Management, M&E, Knowledge Management, and Learning (US$9.0 
million equivalent IDA). This component will finance the operational costs of the Project Management 
Units in participating FMS and Somaliland, as well as project coordination and fiduciary support at the FRS 
level. The component would also be responsible for M&E, knowledge management and learning, and 
evidence-based policy input. This component also covers the Contingent Emergency Response (CERC) 
subcomponent of the project that will support immediate and rapid response emergency needs. 
Component activities will be delivered through three subcomponents. 
40. 
Subcomponent 4.1. Project Management (US$4.0 Million IDA). This subcomponent will ensure 
that the project is implemented efficiently, on time, and in accordance with the Financing Agreement. A 
strong PIU will be established and staffed by a team of experts at the national, state, and district levels. 
This subcomponent will support (a) the incremental operating costs for managing the project, (b) the cost 
of procurement and FM specialists, and (c) outreach and communications on the Government’s role and 
leadership on the project to the broader Somali community. 
41. 
Subcomponent 4.2. M&E, Knowledge Management, and Learning (US$5.0 million IDA). The 
project would support continuous learning and adaptable knowledge management. A web-based 
management information system (MIS) will be set up to track real-time performance of the project and is 
linked to an M&E system to focus on project results and outcome. This subcomponent will finance 
baseline, concurrent monitoring of inputs and outputs and monitoring of safeguards, conflict, and gender 
and focus on developing and disseminating knowledge generated through various project activities. 
Subcomponent activities will incorporate new modern technology such as geo-tagging of site investments, 
collection of field data with tablets/smartphones, and application of geospatial imaging for quantifying 
before and after comparisons for specific indicators. With a view to obtain more information and 
knowledge on the extent and period of flood, this subcomponent will support technical work such as flood 
mapping and support to information sharing.  
42. 
Given the nascent institutional capacity of multisectoral rural resilience in Somalia, this 
subcomponent will allow the FRS to engage a suitably qualified and experienced international 
independent firm to provide quality enhancement and implementation support to the project. The 
objective of the support will be to provide an additional and independent monitoring and assurance 
ensuring that project funds are used for the purposes specified in project grant agreements. The firm will 
be contracted by the FRS and will support Somali authorities to fulfill their fiduciary, procurement, 
monitoring, and supervision obligations with respect to all four project components. The firm will also be 
responsible for monitoring the development of capacity within recipient organizations and agencies such 
that they advise on capacity-building needs to carry out the FM, procurement, and project management 
obligations. Capacity assessment will be done in collaboration with the World Bank task team and the 
FMS contracted engineering and sustainable land management implementation support entities 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 79 
 
providing technical assistance and backstopping support for Components 1, 2, and 3. To this extent, the 
firm will be expected to provide advisory as well as monitoring support to the World Bank.  
43. 
Subcomponent 4.3. Contingent Emergency Response (US$0). This subcomponent will support 
immediate and rapid response to an eligible crisis or emergency, as needed. This zero-cost component 
will finance eligible expenditures under the Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) in the case of natural 
or manmade crises or disasters, severe economic shocks, or other crises and emergencies in Somalia. It 
can be triggered through formal declaration of a national emergency by the government authority and 
upon a formal request from the FRS to the World Bank through the Ministry of Finance (MoF).  
44. 
In such cases, funds from other project components will be reallocated to finance emergency 
response expenditures to meet agricultural crises and emergency needs. The emergency response would 
include mitigation, recovery, and reconstruction following crises and disasters, such as severe droughts, 
floods, disease outbreaks, and landslides, among others. Implementation of this subcomponent will 
follow a detailed Contingent Emergency Response Implementation Plan (CERIP) satisfactory to the World 
Bank that will be prepared for each eligible emergency. The Project Operations Manual (POM) will have a 
dedicated annex for a Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) in line with the October 2017 
guidelines.  
C. Project Cost and Financing 
Table 1. Summary of Project Costs by Component and Financing Source (US$ million) 
Component/Subcomponent 
Subtotal 
Percentage 
Component 1. Support the Development of Multiple Use Water Sources  
15,000,000 
36 
1.1 Improved community water points constructed under the project 
11,500,000 
  
1.2 Improved community water points rehabilitated under the project 
3,500,000 
  
Component 2. Institutional and Capacity Development  
6,000,000 
14 
2.1 National and state institutional capacity building 
2,000,000 
  
2.2 Community development and demand mobilization 
4,000,000 
  
Component 3. Supporting Sustainable Land Management and Livelihoods 
Development Around Water Points  
9,500,000 
23 
3.1 Integrated landscape management 
3,500,000 
 
3.2 Agriculture and livestock support 
6,000,000 
 
Component 4. Project Management, M&E, Knowledge Management, and 
Learning 
9,000,000 
21 
4.1 Project management 
4,000,000 
  
4.2 M&E, knowledge management, and learning 
5,000,000 
  
4.3 Contingent emergency response 
 
  
Subtotal Components 
39,500,000 
94  
Contingency  
2,500,000  
6 
TOTAL  
42,000,000 
  
 
45. 
Lending instrument. The proposed lending instrument is Investment Project Financing (IPF), 
comprising an IDA grant of US$42 million equivalent to the FRS, implemented over five years. The IPF 
instrument was selected in view of its flexibility and suitability for financing a broad range of activities, 
including investments, technical assistance, and capacity-building measures. The project’s component 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 79 
 
allocation has also considered a contingency of US$2.5 million to meet price variations on goods and 
services during implementation.   
46. 
In line with the project’s plan to scale up activities under WALP in Puntland and Somaliland while 
starting with new pilots in Galmudug and South West States, and also considering the existing capacity 
and the functions expected in each of the participating institutions, project costs will be allocated as 
follows. 
Table 2.  Project Costs by Implementing Agency and Geography (US$ million) 
 
 
Total Budget 
42.00
$             
FGS
1.00
        
4.50
$                     
2.50
        
Agriculture
Livestock
Water
Environment
0.25
                 
0.25
              
0.25
                 
0.25
                
Agriculture
Livestock
Water
Environment
Planning
 $                    5.00 
0.50
                 
0.50
              
2.00
                 
0.50
                
1.50
        
Agriculture
Livestock
Water
Environment
Planning
 $                    5.00 
0.50
                 
0.50
              
2.00
                 
0.50
                
1.50
        
Water
Livestock
Planning
 $                  13.50 
6.00
                 
3.00
              
0.50
                 
3.00
                
1.00
        
Agriculture
Livestock
Water
Environment
Planning
 $                  14.00 
3.25
                 
3.25
              
1.00
                 
5.00
                
1.50
        
Finance
Agriculture
Livestock
Water
Water & 
Environment
Planning
1.00
$                     
7.50
                 
7.50
              
5.75
                 
12.25
              
8.00
        
Ministry of Finance (MOF)
Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Development 
Puntland
Somaliland
PIU (Project Coordinator, FM, Procurement, Safeguards Specialists) - housed Environment
FEDERAL GOVERNMNET OF SOMALIA (FGS)
FEDERAL MEMBER STATES
 PIU (Project Coordinator, FM, Procurement, Safeguards/M&E Specialists) - housed Environment
South West States
Galmudug
PIU (Project Coordinator, FM, Procurement, Safeguards/M&E Specialists) - housed Planning
PIU (Project Coordinator, FM, Procurement, Safeguards/M&E Specialists) housed Planning
Environment & Agriculture*
SOMALILAND
SECTOR
* in Puntland the Environment and Agriculture Ministries have been merged
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 79 
 
D. Direct Project Beneficiaries 
47. 
The primary project beneficiaries are more than 250,000 (of which 140,000 are women) agro-
pastoralists in Galmudug, Puntland, South West State, and Somaliland. The project will provide benefits 
in the form of access to improved water sources for multiple uses (domestic, livestock, agriculture, and 
horticulture); agricultural extension services (livestock and crops); improved livelihood resilience; and 
adaptive know-how.  
48. 
In Somalia, women and children are typically responsible at the household level for collecting 
water. Access to improved water supply and sanitation facilities is expected to contribute to poverty 
reduction and better gender equality among the beneficiary populations by addressing burdens borne by 
women and girls. This includes the benefits of reduced time and effort spent in collecting water, as well 
as associated benefits such as personal security, health, and economic productivity. The project will 
emphasize the role of women in the decision-making process at various stages of system design, 
implementation, and management to improve the sustainability of investments and improve the quality 
of life. Gender-disaggregated indicators will be used to track gender equity in roles and benefits from the 
project. Moreover, World Bank experience in other countries shows that families with members who have 
a disability are often among the poorest and most marginalized in communities. To maximize inclusion in 
decision making, implementation, and benefits, the project will identify beneficiaries affected with 
disability, so they are included in the design of the infrastructure, in the prioritization of livelihoods, and 
in linking to assistive services.  
49. 
Given the large role that women play in both agriculture and livestock activities, the project will 
address challenges that have traditionally limited women’s productivity particularly access to extension 
services and inputs. Drawing on lessons from ongoing agro-pastoral investments in Somalia, the project 
can make participation by women mandatory (for example, 30 percent of leadership positions) in Village 
Development Committees (VDCs) that participate in the project. An audit of processes will be conducted 
to determine risk points where women can be excluded for example, selection for asset transfers and 
labor-intensive public works (LIPW) income-earning opportunities.  Training in livestock management and 
cropping will be designed to train family units together where possible, which has been found to not only 
increase women’s access to training but also increase awareness among all family members of the role 
women play. Other training will be designed and delivered at times and locations that are convenient to 
women given the demands for their time from other duties, and child care will be provided to facilitate 
their participation. The POM will clarify how this is going to be tracked.  
50. 
As outlined in the CPF, job creation is a top priority for growth, development, and social stability 
in Somalia. By mobilizing and empowering women and youth as positive agents of change and supporting 
the growth and development of rural livelihoods, the project will help address key drivers of 
intergenerational poverty and conflict. In project areas, the construction of infrastructure (for example, 
dams, offices and community centers) and related procurement of goods and services will create new 
jobs and revenue streams for local businesses. Land management and livelihood support interventions 
and cash for work programs will provide communities and households with crucial productive assets and 
income-generating opportunities. Core project interventions will be complemented by targeted 
investments in mobilizing and capacitating women and youth groups to engage in other income-
generating activities such as sustainable charcoal production, provision of animal health and nutrition 
services, and community gardening. The project will also explore income-enhancing opportunities 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 79 
 
through value addition and, where feasible, linking communities with surplus production to downstream 
markets. 
E. Results Chain 
Figure 1. Overview of Project Results Chain 
 
Note: HH = Household. 
 
51. 
Somalia is especially vulnerable to climate shocks and the resulting cyclical droughts and floods 
that hit communities, which are increasing with climate change. Following decades of insecurity, the 
infrastructure and local knowledge to manage these shocks and traditional coping mechanisms have 
deteriorated significantly. Land depleted of vegetation cover cannot retain flood waters that wash fertile 
soil away nor can it support extensive pastoral livelihood systems. Degradation is accelerated by droughts. 
With the loss of animals to drought and poor performing crops, many communities have migrated out of 
rural areas, relying on humanitarian assistance from the diaspora or on non-sustainable extractive 
livelihoods (for example, charcoal making) for income. Food and nutrition security is low among rural 
households, which affects their overall health and productivity. 
52. 
This project will deliver water harvesting and storage infrastructure and facilitate community 
action to help restore the quality of the land. It will leverage sand dam and other water-harvesting 
technology to enhance the adaptive capacity of Somalia’s dry lands and the livelihoods that depend on 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 79 
 
them. Through rigorous social mobilization processes, the project will help communities better 
understand how their decisions about management of land and water resources affect their well-being 
and how to become more climate-resilient. Communities will be aided to improve the quality of their land 
and water resources and to invest in the technology, training, and services necessary to improve crop 
production, pasture management and fodder production, animal health, and productivity. With improved 
organization and knowledge, communities can manage a more inclusive development agenda that 
increases the availability of water and food for all their member households and supports sustainable 
livelihoods that generate income for households that can be saved to help them better withstand 
inevitable future shocks. 
53. 
Project implementation is managed by civil servants from the FMS ministries responsible for the 
water, agriculture, land/pasture, and animal resources of their states. By being fully responsible for all 
contracting of works and services and fully participating in community mobilization activities, the capacity 
of civil servants to manage limited public resources to deliver services will also be increased. Figure 1 
summarizes the theory of change embedded in the project design. 
F. 
Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
54. 
The design of the project has considered lessons learned from the World Bank’s engagement in 
fragile and conflict settings in general and directly in Somalia during the last 3–4 years. More importantly 
the project design is based on the lessons from the recently completed WALP operation (P152024), that 
includes the following: 
(a) Any initiative to improve the resilience of rural communities from water-related shock in a 
dry environment such as Somalia needs to go beyond water service provision. A more 
holistic, multisectoral, and integrated approach is needed to address challenges and 
maximize livelihood development opportunities across the water/land/climate nexus.  
(b) Resilience is not a onetime activity. It requires champions, the full participation of the 
community, and continuous technical backstopping and monitoring institutions at all levels 
from the community all the way to the federal level are equally important. They need to be 
empowered, capacitated, and strengthened so that they can provide the required support 
to the communities. 
(c) 
In a post conflict setting like Somalia, the use of country systems (even if in a nascent form) 
has multiple advantages. Though the use of country systems carries some implementation 
risk, it helps countries emerge more rapidly from a post conflict situation, reestablish 
government systems, and improve the government-citizen relationship.  
(d) In a post conflict setting like Somalia, a flexible ‘learning-by-doing’ approach is effective and 
the quickest way to transfer knowledge and build the capacity of institutions while 
adaptively mitigating risks. Making available systems procedures and resources provides 
institutions with opportunities to gain on-the-job experience, skills, and confidence.  
55. 
The above lessons are consistent with the project’s theory of change, which is “supporting 
institutional development at the local, subnational, and national levels and channeling integrated, 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 79 
 
strategic investments into water, land, and people will enhance the relevance and sustainability of project 
investments and reinforce poverty impacts.” 
56. 
Beyond the Somali experience, the project design is influenced by many years of evolving and 
successful World Bank programs in integrated land/water management in other parts of Africa (Ethiopia, 
Malawi, and Great Lakes Region), India, and Latin America. Key lessons include using a participatory 
approach with communities for planning and implementation, while building strong local institutions; 
undertaking a larger-scale strategic assessment to guide small-scale implementation; using a watershed 
framework for developing integrated land and water interventions; including a livelihoods component to 
improve equity for women and other disadvantaged groups, and increase local incomes; and applying 
remote sensing and other information technology tools such as geographic information systems (GIS) to 
support planning and M&E.  
57. 
Somalia suffers from acute unemployment and underemployment. Jobs play an important role 
in fragile environments. They not only contribute directly to poverty reduction, productivity, and 
economic growth but also facilitate social cohesion and reduce the risk of violence. However, the jobs 
environment in Somalia is particularly challenging with high political, economic, and social risks; 
inadequate institutional capacity; a difficult political economy; and significant constraints on financial 
resources to support recovery and reconstruction. According to the International Labor Organization 
(ILO), 54 percent of the active population (ages 15 to 64) in Somalia is unemployed. Unemployment rates 
are considerably higher among women and Somalis under 30 years of age, who represent 70 percent of 
the population. The unemployment rate among youth ages 14 to 29 years is 67 percent—among the 
highest rates in the world (Human Development Report, UNDP 2015). Women fare worse20 (74 percent) 
compared to men (61 percent). Due to high fertility rates, estimated at 6.2 births per woman between 
2010 and 2015, the youth population in Somalia (increasingly marginalized and deeply discouraged 
majority group) is arguably more vulnerable than any other to extremism and criminal behavior and the 
numbers will continue to swell.  
58. 
To address these challenges and create job opportunities, well-structured assistance is needed. 
To help strengthen engagement on jobs in fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) settings, the World Bank 
has developed an integrated jobs framework. This framework recognizes that progress on jobs in fragile 
situations is hard-won, and even interventions with limited reach are crucial tools for emergency relief, 
stabilization, and starting momentum in private sector recovery. This is true for livelihood programs, as 
well as programs targeting investments in certain sectors, regions, or firms. Progress on jobs is particularly 
crucial in FCV countries. Jobs are transformational, providing income, productivity, and social cohesion. 
As outlined in the CPF, job creation is a top priority for growth, development, and social stability in 
Somalia. By mobilizing and empowering women and youth as positive agents of change and supporting 
the growth and development of rural livelihoods, the project will help address key drivers of 
intergenerational poverty and conflict in Somalia. In project areas, the construction of infrastructure (for 
example, dams, offices, and community centers) and related procurement of good and services will create 
new jobs and revenue streams for Somali businesses. Land management and livelihood support 
interventions and cash-for-work programs will provide communities and households with crucial 
productive assets and income-generating opportunities. Core project interventions will be complemented 
                                            
20 Gender inequality is alarmingly high in Somalia at 0.776 out of a value of 1 (complete inequality), with Somalia at the fourth lowest position 
globally on the Gender Inequality Index, if internationally comparable data were available. Women suffer severe exclusion and inequality in all 
dimensions of the index—health, employment, and labor market participation (UNDP 2015). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 79 
 
by targeted investments in mobilizing and capacitating women and youth groups to engage in other 
income-generating activities such as sustainable charcoal production, provision of animal health and 
nutrition services, and community gardening. The project will also explore opportunities for income-
enhancing opportunities through value addition and linking communities with surplus production with 
downstream markets. 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
59. 
All project interventions will be led by state-level ministries, while tracking and reporting of 
project progress will happen at the federal level.  
60. 
Federal-level roles and responsibilities. A Federal Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee chaired 
on a rotational basis by the Ministries of Water and Energy Resources; Ministry of Agriculture and 
Irrigation; Ministry of Livestock, Forestry, and Range; and the Environment Directorate in the Office of the 
Prime Minister (OPM) (to empower technical ministries in the overall oversight of implementation) and 
comprising the MoF; Ministry of Planning Investment and Economic Development (MoPIED); Ministry of 
Livestock, Forestry, and Range; Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation; Ministry of Water and Energy 
Resources; and the OPM will be convened for the duration of the project. The Ministry of Water and 
Energy Resources will take the first chair role. The Steering Committee will meet quarterly to review the 
project’s progress and identify policy or regulatory issues, particularly cross-sectoral issues, that will 
surface during project implementation. The MoF oversees all project disbursements to line ministries at 
the federal and member state level and coordinates all financial reporting. The project will support 
additional human resource at the MoF to manage the financial aspects and to coordinate with the 
MoPIED. 
61. 
A National Project Coordination Unit (PCU) with a project coordinator, supported by an M&E 
specialist and data analyst, a procurement specialist, and specialists as needed with medium- and short-
term input, will be appointed at the MoPIED to maximize the flow of communications among the federal 
ministries, FMS, and Somaliland. This will help the MoPIED oversee the M&E aspect of the project through 
its M&E Department. The National project coordinator will be responsible for maintaining a unified 
Results Framework for the project. Funds for policy analysis and other relevant sector studies will be made 
available to each stakeholder ministry at the federal level. FRS will also engage a suitably qualified and 
experienced international independent firm that will support the National PIU by providing quality 
enhancement and implementation support to the project.  
62. 
State-level roles and responsibilities. Somaliland and each FMS will establish and maintain a PIU 
with representation from each participating line ministry to ensure cross-sectoral collaboration in 
planning and implementation activities. The PIUs will be staffed by a project management specialist and 
relevant fiduciary and safeguards specialists, in addition to the seconded sectoral specialists, to ensure 
high quality throughout implementation. A specific indicator has been included in the Results Framework 
under Component 2: Number of PIUs established under the project and functioning, and of which female 
staff is 50 percent. Drawing from experiences in the WALP where it was found that having women playing 
key roles in the PIUs greatly improved project implementation, the WAPR will seek to replicate this good 
practice and ensure women’s participation by encouraging governments to establish PIUs that are gender 
balanced. This is particularly important in the south where initial indications, from pre-appraisal meeting 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 79 
 
attendance (where no women joined any of the meetings), are that civil servant women are marginalized 
and not included in water, livestock, and agriculture project implementation or decision making.  
63. 
At the community level, while not part of the supply-side implementation structure, as such, the 
project will work through representative community institutions to provide leadership of the 
implementation process, including organizing the village for participation in the project, identifying and 
agreeing on investment priorities, and organizing the community to deliver those investments in 
collaboration with the Government and other service providers. This system of community institutions for 
problem identification, planning, and execution is called a community management system in this project. 
In many communities, such an organization the VDCs have already been formed under other programs, 
and the project will work with them. In other communities, the project will facilitate the creation of such 
VDCs. Leadership of the VDCs will be elected from the village members and will include representatives 
from the different stakeholder groups within the village. In particular, the project will require that 40 
percent of the VDC leadership are women to ensure that women’s voices are included in development 
investment decisions.  
64. 
Community mobilization and planning. Each state government will oversee the community 
mobilization process, which will engage communities throughout the project to help them identify their 
priority water interventions (costs and benefits of different technologies), how they will manage their 
water infrastructure, and how the community will use the water to increase their food security and 
income opportunities. Given capacity and human resource constraints at the state level, the project will 
provide funds to contract implementation support of the mobilization activity. Anchored by a robust and 
inclusive consultative process, community mobilization activities will serve to inform the team’s evolving 
understanding of the risk landscape and, thereby, will help ensure that project interventions are conflict 
sensitive and well aligned with project safeguards. The approach will bring together all members of a 
village, ensuring the inclusion of all stakeholder groups for example, pastoralists, irrigated farmers, rainfed 
farmers, landless laborers, women, and youth.  
65. 
Water infrastructure. To inform key design elements of water interventions, state-level ministries 
responsible for water will contract consultant engineers to (a) identify areas with potential for water 
development; (b) inform the mobilization discussions led by the Government with communities; and (c) 
provide detailed designs and supervision of the construction of water infrastructure.  
66. 
Each FMS will respond to the demand articulated by community-level institutions, considering 
their preferences: (a) for the types of technology for water catchment, storage, and management; (b) for 
siting infrastructure given their knowledge of water flows and service needs; and (c) options for 
involvement in construction works.  
67. 
Community consultation will weigh the pros and cons of technological choices considering factors 
such as (a) equity of access to water resources and abstraction rights; (b) affordability constraints for 
different types faced by communities; and (c) upstream and downstream impacts on water use including 
environmental flows. Construction companies will be contracted separately to carry out the construction 
works. The construction process, where requested by communities, will include labor-intensive methods.  
68. 
Service delivery contracts will focus on operationalizing the livelihood plans created under 
Subcomponent 2.2. Each PIU will have a budget envelope to support community-driven investments in 
watershed/landscape management, agriculture, and livestock activities, from which they can calculate a 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 79 
 
maximum investment envelope per community. FMS ministries will have funds available to contract 
implementation support from qualified NGOs, firms, or agencies to support community land and 
livelihood investments and to ensure the technical quality and sustainability of those investments. 
Implementing partners will engage directly with the community and livelihood groups formed through 
the mobilization process to implement their priority investments through training; civil works (for 
example, bunding, terracing, reforestation, pasture restoration, and community service center); and asset 
provision (for example, seeds, farm tools, machinery, and water-efficient irrigation equipment) needed to 
support the growth and development of livelihoods. Technical staff from state-level ministries will work 
with and provide oversight to implementation service providers to ensure the technical quality of training 
and other activities. 
69. 
Readiness criteria. To mitigate risks related to the rollout of the project into new geographic areas 
in the south where government structures are less developed and human resource capacities weaker, the 
project will adopt a stepwise, incremental approach on two separate tracks. Project activities would be 
rolled out in Somaliland and Puntland immediately following project effectiveness, while in Galmudug and 
South West States, activities will focus during the initial 18 months of the project on laying the necessary 
groundwork through training and other support to address readiness criteria for accession to the project. 
This would provide more time for the PIUs and the extended project team to gain experience and refine 
the approach as challenges, not to be underestimated, of scaling out to new areas are encountered and 
overcome. This approach will also embed flexibility during initial project ramp up to modify the project’s 
implementation schedule and planning if the need arises. The project could then, more comfortably and 
with less risk, initiate project activities in the two FMS in Southern and Central Somalia in month 18 of 
project implementation. Among the criteria that the project will use to evaluate the readiness for entry 
of the two new states are (a) the presence of a State MoF with External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
(EAFS); (b) evidence of an appropriate level of institutional capacity (that is, human resources and office 
facilities) across line ministries; and (c) strong experience with inter-ministerial collaboration, including 
with the FRS.  
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements  
70. 
The project will support continuous learning and adaptable knowledge management. The existing 
web-based MIS will be enhanced, if needed, to track real-time performance of the project. Data will feed 
into a robust M&E system developed to focus on project results and outcome. This subcomponent will 
finance baseline, concurrent monitoring of inputs and outputs and monitoring of safeguards, conflict, and 
gender, and will focus on developing and disseminating knowledge generated through various project 
activities. Subcomponent activities will incorporate new modern technology such as geo-tagging of site 
investments, collection of field data with tablets/smartphones, and application of geospatial imaging for 
quantifying before and after comparisons for specific indicators. This subcomponent will be managed by 
the MoPIED and budgeted for under Subcomponent 4.2. 
71. 
Robust M&E frameworks developed under the WALP, and which mainly focused on 
hydrogeological monitoring, will be revisited and strengthened for the WAPR, ensuring that new activities, 
especially from Component 2, are included. Each PIU will include an M&E officer, and this person will 
initially be tasked with modifying the existing survey forms to include questions related to Component 2. 
The modified survey form will be used to work with VDCs to (a) undertake baseline surveys; (b) discuss 
how village-level monitoring will be done; and (c) update the WALP M&E framework. A baseline report 
will be produced following the first quarter of the project; thereafter, quarterly M&E reports will be 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 79 
 
provided to the project coordinator who will send them to the Federal Government Coordinator for 
consolidation and submission to the World Bank.  
C. Sustainability 
72. 
Experience in the agricultural and water sectors has shown that the impact of multiple social, 
economic, technical, institutional, or environmental factors operating over a long period may influence 
the sustainability of services in rural areas. Based on lessons learned from similar projects, the project 
design will work toward strengthening and supporting sustainability of systems through activities aimed 
at, among others,  
(a) Supporting the involvement of beneficiary communities and strengthening the participation 
and role of women in all cycles of project design and implementation; 
(b) Strengthening the units responsible for post-construction operation and maintenance 
support at all levels; 
(c) 
Supporting the enabling environment for active participation of the private sector to support 
operation and maintenance; 
(d) Supporting continuous and periodical refresher trainings for user communities and directly 
related institutions at different levels; and 
(e) Supporting the choice of services and appropriate technologies, such as water technologies 
and agricultural services during scheme design and implementation. 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
A. Economic and Financial Analysis 
73. 
The economic and financial analysis follows World Bank guidelines and reflects evidence from 
similar projects in Somalia and elsewhere in the region. Annex 2 presents the detailed results. In summary, 
a detailed cost-benefit analysis model has been developed to assess the financial and economic impacts 
of these proposed project interventions and anticipated outcomes. The cost-benefit model analyzes cash 
flows over a 15-year period discounted at 15 percent under the base-case scenario and 20 percent under 
a higher-risk scenario to reflect the high cost of capital in the Somali context, where commercial projects 
often require a 100 percent return within the first year of operations. Identified streams of benefits accrue 
through direct financial savings and improved health of project beneficiaries.  
74. 
Based on the analysis, for each million-dollar invested in the proposed water infrastructure and 
livelihood development activities is estimated to generate a discounted return of US$5.85 million under 
the baseline assumptions. The net present value (NPV) of the total benefits is estimated to be US$144.3 
million with an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 135 percent against a discounted World Bank 
investment of US$32.9 million. These gains are observed primarily from improving sustained access to 
water for an estimated 250,000 agro-pastoralists by constructing and rehabilitating water infrastructure 
and small works and existing assets. The NPV highlights the significant financial benefits that will accrue 
to the various project beneficiaries. An EIRR that is above the estimated cost of capital also indicates that 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 79 
 
the project represents a financially viable investment.  
B. Technical  
Greenhouse Gas Accounting 
75. 
The World Bank uses the Ex Ante Carbon-Balance Tool (EX-ACT) to estimate the impact of 
agricultural investment lending on greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and carbon sequestration. EX-ACT is 
a land-based appraisal system for assessing a project’s net carbon balance—the net balance of tons of 
CO2 equivalent (tCO2-eq) of GHGs that were emitted, or carbon sequestered as a result of project 
interventions—compared to a “without project” scenario. The net emissions for the project are 12,580 
tCO2-eq over the project’s 15-year economic lifetime. The average annual emissions are 838 tCO2-eq. The 
gross lifetime emissions are 18,084 tCO2-eq. The greenfield supply systems under Component 1 have 
estimated net emissions of 13,758 tCO2-eq due to electricity use and zero-emissions baseline scenario. 
The brownfield rehabilitation water supply systems under Component 1 have estimated net emissions of 
−1,178 tCO2-eq due to an estimated 10 percent increase in energy efficiency gains, which is a respectable 
level of net emission reductions for a project of this size in a country where the World Bank has only 
recently started financing projects again. The systems to be replaced are still within their original 
economic lifetimes. In addition, both the brownfield and greenfield investments are expected to lock in 
the use of solar pumping and other solar systems, as well as zero-emissions gravity use.  
Financial Management 
76. 
Financial Management Assessment. The purpose of the assessment was to determine whether 
the FM arrangements in place ensure that financial resources reach the implementing and executing 
agencies and ultimate project beneficiaries in the shortest time possible, are used to finance the intended 
activities, are accounted for properly, and auditing arrangements are acceptable. At the national level, 
the EAFS Unit established within the Office of the Accountant General in the MoF is charged with overall 
FM responsibility for all the MPF/IDA-funded projects at the FRS and FMS. With overall guidance from the 
Accountant General, the EAFS Unit, in consultation with the respective Public Finance Management 
Reform Coordinating Units, will provide day-to-day FM of the project. The effectiveness of the EAFS Unit 
alongside other key functional units will be continuously monitored while key areas of capacity 
strengthening will be identified and supported through the project. All project FM transactions will be 
recognized, captured, recorded, analyzed, summarized, and reported through the Government(s) 
Financial Management Information System (FMIS). 
77. 
Flow of Funds Arrangements. The project will adopt the Statement of Expenditure (SoE) method 
of disbursement. The project will open and maintain three Designated Accounts (DAs), two DAs at the CBS 
and one operated separately by Somaliland in a financial institution acceptable to the World Bank. DA-A 
in Mogadishu will be dedicated for the project activities implemented directly by the FRS, whereas DA-B 
will be ring-fenced and dedicated for the project activities implemented by the FMS (except Somaliland). 
DA-C will be dedicated for the project activities implemented by Somaliland. Each of the FMS will open 
and operate a Project Account (PA) to which initial funds disbursements to the PAs will be based on cash 
forecast to allow the FMS adequate working capital to implement the project activities. Subsequent funds 
disbursement from DA-B to the PAs will be supported by SoEs. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 79 
 
C. Procurement 
78. 
Procurement Assessment. MoPIED (the main implementing agency at the national level) has no 
prior experience of implementing World Bank-funded projects and procurement capacity at the FMS 
levels is in inadequate. Thus, WAPR will endeavor to build procurement capacity during implementation 
through recruitment of qualified and experienced procurement staff. In addition, TA, short-term, and 
hands-on training will be provided to strengthen procurement capacity at all levels. Additional risk 
mitigation measures are detailed in the procurement section. 
79. 
Procurement. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the requirements in the 
Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers: Goods, Works, Non-Consulting and Consulting Services, 
dated July 1, 2016 (revised November 2017 and August 2018); ‘Guidelines on Preventing and Combating 
Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
(IBRD) Loans and IDA Credits and Grants (revised as of July 1, 2016)’; and provisions stipulated in the 
Financing Agreement. Somalia being an FCV country, procurement under the project will be processed 
under special procurement arrangements referred to in paragraph 12 of the World Bank Policy IPF dated 
November 10, 2017. 
80. 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) and Procurement Plan (PP). According to 
the requirement of the regulations, the Recipient has developed a PPSD, based on which the PP for the 
first 18 months has also been prepared. The PPSD identifies that, contracts under works include 
construction of sand/subface dams, earth dams, boreholes/shallow wells, rehabilitation of previous WALP 
water structures, and office construction/rehabilitation. These being small works, the market research 
shows that there are several qualified local contractors, many of whom have participated and completed 
projects of similar nature, complexity, and value. Under the previous WALP, it has been observed that 
local construction companies have experience in similar works, financial capacity, and sufficient expertise. 
The contracts under goods include ICT equipment, vehicles, office furniture, hydrological water tools, and 
office supplies. The contracts under non-consulting services include activities such as hiring of conference 
facilities and transport or IT services. The type and budget for such activities will be defined and agreed 
between the Borrower and the World Bank during the project implementation period. Recruitment of 
individual consultants and consulting firms, NGOs, and UN-specialized agencies as the need arises for 
technical support and assistance. The PP sets out the selection methods to be followed by the Recipient 
during project implementation in the procurement of goods, works, consulting and non-consulting 
services, cost estimates, time schedules, the World Bank’s review requirements, brief description of the 
activities/contract, and so on. The PP will be updated at least every 12 months, or as required, to reflect 
the actual project implementation needs, but each update shall require World Bank Group approval. All 
PPs will be publicly disclosed in accordance with the World Bank Group disclosure policy. 
81. 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP). The World Bank Group’s STEP system 
will be used to prepare, clear, and update PPs and conduct all procurement transactions for the project. 
The PIUs under WALP have been trained and are using STEP and the World Bank STEP champion and the 
procurement specialist will continue working closely with PIUs for smooth use of STEP.  
D. Safeguards  
82. 
Environmental safeguards. The proposed WAPR is classified as environmental category ‘B’, in 
accordance with the World Bank’s OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), due to potential adverse 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Water for Agro-pastoral Productivity and Resilience (P167826) 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 79 
 
environmental and social impacts which are site specific and reversible. These potential adverse 
environmental impacts may include the following: (a) landscape degradation, especially topsoil 
disturbance and hardpan setting; (b) possible loss of flora and fauna due to land clearance; (c) inefficient 
waste management during the water infrastructure construction and operation and maintenance phases; 
(d) water pollution and contamination at hafir dams, with concomitant increase in the prevalence of 
waterborne diseases; (e) noise, dust, and vibration from construction and maintenance; (f) inadequate 
occupational health and safety (OHS) practices; and (g) social conflicts between preexisting and new land 
users. 
83. 
The project has triggered the World Bank’s OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), as seasonal streams 
will be altered, OP 4.09 (Pest Management) since the project plans to support agricultural intensification, 
OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) for any unexpected occurrences of physical cultural resources 
and, OP/BP 4.37 (Safety of Dams) since it will support the construction of small dams. An Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been developed to specify potential adverse impacts; 
detail mitigation measures; and outline safeguards supervision, monitoring, reporting, and capacity 
building. Public consultations were held and the ESMF and RPF were disclosed on January 15, 2019 on 
both the World Bank external website and in-country. The Executive Summary of the ESMF was disclosed 
prior to appraisal.  
84. 
The project also triggered OP/BP 7.50 (Projects on International Waterways) as it involves the 
construction of small-scale sand and sub-surface dams and surface water storage infrastructures. 
However, this small-scale water structures are not going to be built on the main rivers of Juba and Shebelle 
rivers which are international waterways as defined by paragraph 1(a) of OP 7.50.  Rather they will be 
built on the small tributaries and sub tributaries of dry river beds and are not expected to affect flow into 
Shebele and Juba rivers. Moreover, all the tributaries proposed for sand dams and subsurface dams run 
exclusively within Somalia which is the lowest downstream riparian. OP 7.50 requires riparian’s to be 
notified and for projects with activities that have negligible impact on the flows to international water 
ways, allows exception from notification. Based on this background, it was determined that the activities 
under this project will have no impact on the flows to rivers Juba and Shebele and an exception for 
notification was approved by the Africa Regional Vice President on February 15, 2019. 
