 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD3015  
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT 
ON A 
 
PROPOSED GRANT 
(PRE-ARREARS CLEARANCE GRANT) 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 12.9 MILLION 
 
(US$18 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
TO THE 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
FOR A 
 SOMALIA CAPACITY ADVANCEMENT, LIVELIHOODS AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP, 
THROUGH DIGITAL UPLIFT PROJECT  
February 22, 2019 
Finance, Competitiveness, and Innovation Global Practice 
Africa Region 
 
 
 
   
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
Exchange Rate Effective January 31, 2019 
 
Currency Unit = Somali Shilling 
SOS 578 = US$1 
US$1.40 = SDR 1 
 
January 1 – December 31 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
ALM 
Assets and Liabilities Management 
AMC 
Annual Maintenance Contract 
AML/CFT 
Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism  
AMISOM 
African Union Mission in Somalia 
ATS 
Automated Transfer System 
BDS 
Business Development Services 
CBS 
Central Bank of Somalia 
CDD 
Customer Due Diligence  
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework 
DA 
Designated Account 
DE4A 
Digital Economy for Africa 
DFI 
Development Finance Institution 
E&S 
Environmental and Social 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
ESMS 
Environmental and Social Management System 
FATF 
Financial Action Task Force 
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FIDEP 
Financial Institutions Development Program 
FIDP 
Financial Institutions Development Plan 
FIL 
Financial Institutions Law 
FIU 
Financial Intelligence Unit 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMIS 
Financial Management Information System 
FMS 
Federal Member States 
FRC 
Financial Reporting Center 
G2P 
Government-to-Person 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
GBV 
Gender-Based Violence 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEEL 
Growth, Enterprise, Employment, and Livelihoods 
GRM 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
HIPC 
Heavily Indebted Poor Country 
ICT 
Information and Communications Technology 
ID4D 
Identification for Development 
IDP 
Internally Displaced Person 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
IFR 
Interim Financial Report 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
IPSAS 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards 
IRR 
Internal Rate of Return 
IRU 
Indefeasible Right of Use 
ISA 
International Standards on Auditing 
KYC 
Know Your Customer 
LEA 
Law Enforcement Agency 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MDAs 
Ministries, Departments, and Agencies 
MEF 
Monitoring and Evaluation Framework 
MFD 
Maximizing Finance for Development 
MFI 
Microfinance Institution 
MIS 
Management Information System 
MNO 
Mobile Network Operator  
MoCI 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
MoF 
Ministry of Finance 
MoIFAR 
Ministry of Interior, Federal Affairs, and Reconciliation 
MOU 
Memorandum of Understanding 
MPF 
Multi-Partner Fund 
MPTT 
Ministry of Posts, Telecommunications, and Technology 
MSMEs 
Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises 
MTB 
Money Transfer Business 
MTO 
Money Transfer Operator 
NADRA 
National Database and Registration Authority 
NCA 
National Communications Authority 
NDP 
National Development Plan 
NGO 
Nongovernmental Organization 
NPL 
Nonperforming Loan 
NPS 
National Payment Systems 
NPV 
Net Present Value 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
NRA 
National Risk Assessment 
OSS 
One-Stop Shop 
PACG 
Pre-Arrears Clearance Grant  
PAFS 
Project Annual Financial Statement 
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
PFI 
Participating Financial Institution 
PFM 
Public Financial Management 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
POM 
Project Operations Manual 
PP 
Procurement Plan 
PPA 
Public Procurement, Concessions, and Disposal Act 
PPD 
Public-Private Dialogue 
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development 
PSC 
Project Steering Committee 
QPR 
Quarterly Progress Report 
RA 
Reflows Account 
RegTech 
Regulatory Technology 
SBCF 
Somali Business Catalytic Fund 
SCALED-UP 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital 
Uplift Project 
SCoA 
Standard Chart of Accounts 
SCORE 
Somali Core Economic Institutions and Opportunities Project 
SEAP 
Somali Electricity Access Project 
SMEs 
Small and Medium Enterprises 
SMEF 
SME Facility 
SMP 
Staff Monitored Program 
SMPF 
Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
SOE 
Statement of Expenditure 
SomaliREN 
Somalia Research and Education Network 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
TOR 
Terms of Reference 
TTL 
Task Team Leader 
TTWG 
Tripartite Technical Working Group 
UNDB 
United Nations Development Business 
UNDP 
United Nations Development Programme 
WFP 
World Food Programme 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Regional Vice President: Hafez M. H. Ghanem 
Country Director: Bella Bird 
Senior Global Practice Director: Sebastian Molineus 
Practice Manager: Niraj Verma 
Task Team Leader(s): Thilasoni Benjamin Musuku, Axel Rifon Perez 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... 1 
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT .......................................................................................................... 7 
A. Country Context ............................................................................................................................... 7 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ................................................................................................ 10 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ........................................................................................... 15 
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION ..................................................................................................... 17 
A. Project Development Objective .................................................................................................... 17 
B. Project Components ...................................................................................................................... 17 
C. Project Beneficiaries ...................................................................................................................... 24 
D. Results Chain .................................................................................................................................. 25 
E. Rationale for World Bank Group Involvement and Role of Partners ........................................... 26 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design ................................................................... 28 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS .............................................................................. 30 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ........................................................................ 30 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements ...................................................................... 32 
C. Sustainability .................................................................................................................................. 32 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ..................................................................................... 33 
A. Technical, Economic, and Financial Analysis ................................................................................ 33 
B. Fiduciary ......................................................................................................................................... 38 
C. Safeguards ...................................................................................................................................... 38 
V. KEY RISKS ........................................................................................................................ 41 
VI. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ..................................................................... 45 
ANNEX 1: IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT PLAN AND FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS .................. 57 
ANNEX 2: DESCRIPTION OF COMPONENTS ........................................................................... 71 
ANNEX 3: RECENT MONETARY AND FINANCIAL SECTOR DEVELOPMENTS ............................. 86 
ANNEX 4: FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARY FINANCING ................................................................ 92 
ANNEX 5: GENDER ANALYSIS ............................................................................................. 105 
ANNEX 6: DIGITAL ID and MSME FINANCING FACILITY RISKS ASSESSMENT ......................... 111 
ANNEX 7: TEAM LIST .......................................................................................................... 118 
ANNEX 8: MAP OF SOMALIA .............................................................................................. 119 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
  
Page 1 of 119 
 
 
     
DATASHEET 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 
 BASIC INFO TABLE 
Country(ies) 
Project Name 
Somalia 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift 
Project (SCALED-UP) 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental Assessment Category 
Process 
P168115 
Investment Project 
Financing 
B-Partial Assessment 
Urgent Need or 
Capacity Constraints 
(FCC) 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component  (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Disbursement-linked Indicators (DLIs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[✓] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict  
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
07-Mar-2019 
30-Jun-2023 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
Joint Level 
Yes 
Complementary or Interdependent project requiring active coordination 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support progress towards increased access to basic digital financial 
and government services targeting entrepreneurship and employment, particularly for women. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 119 
 
 
Components 
 
Component Name  
Cost (US$, millions) 
 
Strengthening Institutions  
7,000,000.00 
 
Enabling Financial and Digital Services  
20,000,000.00 
 
Project Management and Coordination  
4,000,000.00 
 
 
Organizations 
 
Borrower:  
 Ministry of Finance, Federal Republic of Somalia  
Implementing Agency: 
 Ministry of Finance, Federal Republic of Somalia  
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
Total Project Cost 
31.00 
Total Financing 
31.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
18.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILS-NewFinEnh1 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
18.00 
          IDA Grant 
18.00 
Non-World Bank Group Financing 
     Trust Funds 
13.00 
          Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
13.00 
 
  
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Guarantee Amount 
Total Amount 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 119 
 
 National PBA 
   0.00 
  18.00 
   0.00 
  18.00 
Total 
   0.00 
  18.00 
   0.00 
  18.00 
 
 
 
Expected Disbursements (in US$, Millions) 
 
WB Fiscal Year   
 
 
 
 
 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
   0.50 
   3.66 
   3.93 
   4.41 
   5.50 
Cumulative 
 
 
 
 
 
   0.50 
   4.16 
   8.09 
  12.50 
  18.00 
  
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation 
Transport 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
Gender Tag 
Does the project plan to undertake any of the following? 
a. Analysis to identify Project-relevant gaps between males and females, especially in light of 
country gaps identified through SCD and CPF 
Yes 
b. Specific action(s) to address the gender gaps identified in (a) and/or to improve women or 
men's empowerment 
Yes 
c. Include Indicators in results framework to monitor outcomes from actions identified in (b) 
Yes 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
⚫ High 
2. Macroeconomic 
⚫ High 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ Moderate 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ Substantial 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 119 
 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
⚫ High 
6. Fiduciary 
⚫ High 
7. Environment and Social 
⚫ Substantial 
8. Stakeholders 
⚫ Substantial 
9. Other 
 
10. Overall 
⚫ High 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?  
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
  
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project 
Yes 
No 
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 
✔ 
   
Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities OP/BP 4.03 
  
✔  
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 
  
✔  
Forests OP/BP 4.36 
  
✔  
Pest Management OP 4.09 
  
✔  
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 
  
✔  
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 
  
✔  
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 
  
✔  
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 
  
✔  
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 
  
✔  
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 
  
✔  
 
Legal Covenants 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 119 
 
 Sections and Description 
The Recipient shall not later than 30 days after the Effective Date, establish and thereafter, maintain throughout 
the project implementation, the Project Steering Committee with a mandate, resources, terms of reference and 
functions, satisfactory to the Association. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
The Recipient shall, not later than October 31 of each year prepare and furnish to the Association, a consolidated 
annual program of activities proposed for implementation under the Project during the following Fiscal Year, 
together with a proposed budget for the purpose. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
The Recipient shall furnish to the Association each Project Report not later than forty-five (45) days after the end of 
each calendar semester, covering the calendar semester. 
 
 
 
 
Conditions 
  
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
The Recipient shall have (i) established the MSME Financing Facility, in form and substance 
satisfactory to the World Bank;  and (ii) appointed to said MSME Financing Facility a 
governing board consisting of members drawn from the private and public sector, all with 
qualifications, terms of reference and functions, acceptable to the Association; and (iii) 
recruited to said MSME Financing Facility adequate staff in accordance with the provisions of 
the Procurement Regulations. 
 
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
The Subsidiary Agreement, acceptable to the World Bank, shall have been duly executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Recipient and the  MSME Financing Facility and shall have become 
effective and binding upon such parties in accordance with its respective terms. 
 
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
The Recipient has submitted, in form and substance satisfactory to the World Bank, its policy 
statement regarding its digital identity system, including data protection; 
 
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
The Recipient has prepared and adopted, in form and substance satisfactory to the World 
Bank, the Project Operational Manual. 
 
 
 
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
Effectiveness of each Agreement: (1) For the Financing Agreement:  “the SMPF Grant 
Agreement has been executed and delivered and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness 
or to the right of the Recipient to make withdrawals under it have been fulfilled.”; and (2) For 
the SMPF Grant Agreement: “the Financing Agreement has been executed and delivered and 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 119 
 
all conditions precedent to its effectiveness or to the right of the Recipient to make 
withdrawals under it have been fulfilled." 
 
Type 
Description 
Disbursement 
For payments made prior to the date of the Grant Agreement, or payments under the line of 
credit, no withdrawal shall be made unless: (i) a technical and fiduciary (procurement and 
financial management) assessment of MSME Financing Facility (as an implementing entity for 
the financial intermediary), has been carried out, in a manner acceptable to the Association; 
(ii) a Project Agreement has been executed between the Association and the MSME 
Financing Facility; and (iii) the MSME Subproject Manual (forming an annex or schedule to 
the Project Operations Manual) is prepared and submitted, in form and substance 
satisfactory to the Association. 
 
Type 
Description 
Disbursement 
For payments under the large loans window for MSMEs no withdrawal shall be made unless 
the Technical Agreement has been executed between the IFC and the MSME Financing 
Facility. 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 119 
 
. 
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
A. Country Context 
1. 
Somalia remains a fragile country despite the substantial progress made in recent years to lay 
the foundations for stability and development. Since 2011, Somalia has had a sustained period of 
political, economic, and security-related progress. Consequently, the country has a unique opportunity to 
escape from decades of conflict and fragility, and the Government is demonstrating a strong commitment 
to wide-ranging institutional and economic reforms. Yet, substantial challenges remain, including access 
barriers to services enabling economic opportunities, reconciliation, security sector reform, widespread 
malnutrition, recurrent drought, and poverty. Limited fiscal space constrains service delivery by the 
Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) leading to low trust in the state. The United Nations Population 
Fund’s Population Estimate Survey in 2014 produced the first population estimates for Somalia in many 
years. Total population was estimated at 12.4 million—42 percent urban, 26 percent nomadic, 23 percent 
rural, and 9 percent displaced. In 2017, Somalia’s population was about 14 million, and it is estimated that 
about 69 percent of the population is poor.1 A poverty gap of 29 percent suggests that the consumption 
levels of many of the poor are far from the poverty line and they face deprivations in both monetary and 
non-monetary dimensions.2 
2. 
Somalia’s economic development challenges are equally daunting, and growth remains 
insufficient for reducing vulnerability for a large segment of the population. With an estimated per 
capita gross domestic product (GDP) of US$511 in 2017,3 Somalia remains one of the poorest countries in 
the world. Despite the perpetual civil conflict, the economy has grown at a moderate pace, averaging 2.5 
percent, real GDP growth in 2013–17. Growth is mainly consumption driven, enabled by large remittance 
and aid inflows (US$1.4 billion4 and US$1.75 billion,5 respectively in 2017), while construction, 
telecommunications, and money transfer services have been the key growth sectors. The diaspora 
remittances enable household consumption at 132 percent of GDP and represent an important 
component of income for the bottom 40 percent of households.6 Low electrification rates, especially in 
rural areas, are one of the key constraints for economic growth in Somalia. 
3. 
Unemployment is widespread within Somalia’s young population. With 70 percent of the 
population below the age of 30,7 youth unemployment is at 74 percent and 61 percent for women and 
men, respectively.8 Similarly, for persons with disabilities, unemployment is widespread.  In this setting, 
remittances and humanitarian aid alone are not sufficient to support the development of sustainable 
livelihoods that are necessary for poverty reduction and mitigation of political, social, and economic 
vulnerability. The domestic economy and many local livelihoods are dependent on the livestock sector, 
                                            
1 World Bank. 2018. Somalia High Frequency Survey. December 2017, Wave 2. 
2 Ibid. 
3 World Bank Group. 2018. Somalia Economic Update: Rapid Growth in Mobile Money - Stability or Vulnerability? 
4 IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2017. 2016 IMF Somalia Country Report 17/61. 
5 Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Development, Federal Republic of Somalia. 2018. Aid Flows in Somalia: 
Analysis of Aid Flow Data. 
6 World Bank Group. 2018. Somalia Economic Update: Rapid Growth in Mobile Money - Stability or Vulnerability? 
7 World Bank Group. 2015. Somalia Economic Update: Transition Amid Risks with a Special Focus on Intergovernmental Fiscal 
Relations. 
8 World Bank Group Gender Data Portal. http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/somalia. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 119 
 
which generates trade worth an estimated 40 percent of Somalia’s GDP and represents over 50 percent 
of Somalia’s exports, but which is itself highly vulnerable to drought and trade-related shocks.  
4. 
Poor access to tailored finance to women contributes to limiting female entrepreneurship. An 
analysis of gender gaps in Somalia, in relation to financial and digital access, suggests that women face 
discrimination and considerable socioeconomic barriers to accessing jobs and livelihood opportunities.9 
Traditional gender roles still limit women’s employment opportunities, often excluding them from work 
in formal sectors, generating gender gaps in labor market participation. Gender gaps in education and 
basic literacy translate into weak digital and financial skills among women, which in turn limits their 
financial and digital services access. Nevertheless, Somali women are largely responsible for growth in 
microenterprise activity and yet are not supported to grow and expand their businesses. A recent review 
of the World Bank’s Small and Medium-Size Enterprise Facility (SMEF), which provided business 
development services (BDS) to small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in Somalia under the Somali Core 
Economic Institutions and Opportunities Project (SCORE) (P152241), reiterates that women-led 
businesses struggle to access funding even though there is demand for financing among female-headed 
SMEs. This is partly because financial service providers do not necessarily offer financial products that 
target women, nor do they implement a cohesive policy that targets women in a way that removes 
barriers that currently restrict access. For example, women face discrimination in accessing credit due to 
existing collateral requirements. Even when women have the required collateral, banks typically ask for a 
male guarantor, and when women do receive loans, they are typically microcredit, that is, in the range of 
US$1,000. 
5. 
Somalia has a vibrant private sector, a networked business community and a desire for 
international trade and investment. The agriculture sector, mainly livestock, remains the backbone of 
the Somali economy. Preliminary gross production estimates for the agriculture sector show that the 
sector accounts for the largest share of GDP since the pre-war period—62 percent in 1986–88 to an 
average estimate of about 70 percent in 2013–16 (World Bank and FAO 2018).10 Somalia’s Doing Business 
ranking is the lowest at 190 out of 190 (Doing Business 2019). Somalia has one of the most expensive 
electricity rates, at almost US$1 per kilowatt, and correspondingly the lowest rates of electricity usage in 
the world. Moreover, informality dominates the private sector, making market-based financial 
intermediation challenging particularly in key sectors of the real economy such as energy and livestock. In 
addition, regulatory and institutional capacity gaps—in key enabling sectors such as financial and 
information and communication technology (ICT)—result in an uneven playing field undermining 
economic growth and potential. The development of the manufacturing sector is limited by the harsh 
business environment and the high electricity and transport costs. This, combined with barriers that 
restrict access to services—compounded by fears of money laundering and terrorist financing, as well as 
poor banking relationships between domestic and international banks—creates unpredictability of 
remittance channels and connectedness of the country to international capital sources, deterring large-
scale private and public investment. These service access barriers may, in turn, exacerbate political 
tensions and result in the development of parallel underground ‘shadow markets’. Thus, to support 
                                            
9 See annex 5 for detailed discussion on gender gap analysis in Somalia across labor markets and financials markets and ID 
ownership. 
10 It is difficult to determine sectoral contribution to GDP in Somalia due to lack of national accounts data. New GDP estimates 
by World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) staff are used to compute the sector shares post 2013. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 119 
 
livelihoods and inclusive growth, there is a pressing need to stabilize core institutions offering basic 
services enabling economic opportunities for individuals and businesses.  
6. 
The lack of a robust and inclusive foundational ID system limits financial access and poses 
challenges for broader service delivery and economic growth. Over 77 percent of Somalia’s population 
are estimated to lack an official proof of identity. Although data on ID coverage is scarce, recent surveys 
indicate that women are more likely than men to lack an ID, with an estimated gender gap of at least 9 
percentage points. Existing ID systems are fragmented and designed to meet specific program needs 
rather than to serve as a foundational, multipurpose identification for the entire population (see box 1). 
Moreover, there are no reliable and broadly accessible ID verification or authentication mechanisms, 
further compounding challenges for accessing crucial financial and government services. The lack of a 
robust and inclusive foundational ID system makes it difficult for financial service providers to fulfill 
international customer due diligence (CDD) requirements. Failure to adequately comply with international 
anti-money laundering and countering financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) requirements, due, in part, to a 
lack of robust ‘Know Your Customer (KYC)’ verification mechanisms, have resulted in many Somali 
remittance providers and other financial institutions losing their correspondent banking relationships in 
recent years, posing a threat to the livelihood of millions of Somalis and further impeding financial access 
and entrepreneurship.  
7. 
Somalia’s security situation hampers development initiatives and freedom of movement in the 
country. All development initiatives and staff movements within Somalia are continuously analyzed for 
security threats. If security restrictions are put in place for certain locations, then project activities and 
Box 1. Registration and Identification Approaches in the Humanitarian Sector 
A historic lack of a robust foundational identification system has led to a proliferation of disconnected functional 
registers and, as a result, Somalis must rely on a patchwork of non-interoperable systems and documents to prove 
their identity, most of which are of low quality, with coverage limited to specific municipalities, states, or program 
beneficiaries.  
International organizations, such as the United Nations World Food Programme (WFP), the United Nations Office 
for Project Services (UNOPS), as well as the National Commission for Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons 
(NCRI), collect identity data and issue credentials, often using sophisticated digital and/or biometric identification 
technologies. For example, WFP’s SCOPE system, which is used to register and manage benefit transfers to the 
beneficiaries of WFP assistance in Somalia, contains information on over 4 million individuals (biometric 
registration of 2 million individuals, and additional 2 million individuals registered by collecting their biographic 
data only). Registered beneficiaries are issued electronic transfer cards (e-cards) allowing card holders to 
purchase food at vetted local shops or to receive food assistance.  
While these functional systems can support effective program delivery for the organizations that own and manage 
the beneficiary registries, they offer only limited utility for broader identification purposes. These functional 
systems often use proprietary data management solutions and lack interoperability, making it difficult for third 
parties to reliably verify identities. Because humanitarian organizations often focus on a particular area and only 
a limited number of people per household are issued a credential for service delivery, existing, functional ID 
systems tend to also be limited in scope—both demographically and geographically. At the same time, the 
previous registration experience of humanitarian agencies as well as enrollment strategies and outreach 
campaigns can provide important lessons for achieving high coverage and ensuring the robustness of the 
proposed foundational digital ID. Existing registries could also be leveraged in the future as the FGS will begin to 
deliver its own social protection programs.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 119 
 
staff movements are limited, potentially excluding those locations from development initiatives. 
Alternately, initiatives may be redirected when possible to other appropriate locations, delayed, or 
altogether cancelled. All existing and newly designed World Bank Group operations must be flexible to 
adapt to the changing security context affecting the whole economy in Somalia.  
8. 
Somalia has achieved significant progress in laying the foundations for stability and 
development; however, political and institutional gains must have tangible benefits for people if 
Somalia’s transition is to hold. The World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Somalia 
for FY19-22 (Report No. 124734-SO) aims to increase citizen’s access to services and help restore 
economic resilience—laying the foundations for longer-term poverty reduction and inclusive growth. The 
CPF is based on an analytical framework elaborated in the recently concluded Systematic Country 
Diagnostic as well as the outcome of country level dialogue between the World Bank Group, its Somali 
partners, and the international community. With debt arrears outstanding, Somalia has been ineligible for 
assistance from International Development Association (IDA) and other international finance institutions 
(IFIs)—but the World Bank Group’s reengagement in 2012 funded by the Multi Partner-Fund (MPF) has 
helped stabilize institutions and initiate IFI normalization. With support of eight key donors, the MPF has 
enabled the World Bank Group to strengthen federal institutions and establish basic economic regulatory 
foundations. The MPF will remain the core financing vehicle for the CPF—but will be complemented in 
FY19 by IDA Pre-Arrears Clearance grants of US$140 million targeting the key milestones to reach Decision 
Point under the Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) Initiative. Provided its reform momentum 
continues, Decision Point is feasible within the CPF period, allowing Somalia access to concessional 
resources from IDA and other IFIs, together with investment of private capital from the International 
Finance Corporation (IFC).  
9. 
This project builds on the foundations laid by predecessor projects’ early successes that is, 
SCORE (P152241) and ICT Sector Support (P152358) projects.11 With financing from IDA’s Pre-Arrears 
Clearance Grant (PACG) facility as well as the MPF, the project proposes to further support reforms 
associated with stabilizing core government functions that will help Somali communities overcome 
restrictions on access to services. The supported government institutions are those considered key to 
enabling access to basic financial and government services that offer economic opportunities for 
individuals and businesses. In so doing, the project initiates the development of sustainable mechanisms 
for delivery of targeted accessible government services, enabling efficient and market-based financial 
intermediation, and inclusive growth. These basic financial and government services contribute to 
breaking the cycles of violence and setting Somalia on the path toward economic development. The 
project is initially designed as a four-year program, which if successful in its first phase, additional 
financing may be considered. 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
10. 
Somalia’s financial sector is limited in size, simple in structure, and extremely isolated from the 
global financial system. Access to global banking systems remains uncertain. Over the past three years, 
banks in international jurisdictions such as Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States have 
closed accounts of some Somali remittance companies due to risks related to money laundering, as well 
as legal and regulatory weaknesses. This makes it essential to enhance the understanding of AML/CFT 
                                            
11 See box 2 for further details on the predecessor projects, that is SCORE (P152241) and ICT Sector Support (P152358) projects. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 119 
 
risks of the Financial Reporting Center (FRC), Somalia’s financial intelligence unit,  and to strengthen its 
institutional capability and core systems to receive and analyze financial intelligence on AML/CFT and 
disseminate this intelligence to law enforcement agencies (LEAs), as appropriate. In this setting, the 
impetus for institutional reform is driven by external pressures on Somali policy makers and financial 
institutions to improve governance and institutional effectiveness.  
11. 
Overall, there is meagre intermediation taking place in the Somali credit market, which meets 
only 7 percent of the current demand. Lending is heavily concentrated on short-term trade finance, which 
makes up approximately 85 percent of the total portfolio of financial institutions leaving a large unmet 
market demand in the real economy. This lack of progress to expand access to finance in underserved 
economic segments is partly explained by slow progress in elaborating a financial inclusion strategy to 
underpin public and private sector commitments to address some key institutional and structural 
challenges. In addition, Somali financial institutions are not experienced in lending outside trade finance, 
have a weak pipeline of bankable micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) operating in productive 
sectors of the economy and limited understanding of what constitutes a well-prepared loan application 
for MSMEs operating in productive sectors resulting in little to no provision of credit to businesses and/or 
poor credit quality. 
12. 
The financial system comprises central banks (including in Somaliland), banks, microfinance 
institutions (MFIs), money transfer businesses (MTBs), and mobile network operators (MNOs) providing 
mobile money services. As of January 2019, eight banks and 11 MTBs were licensed by the Central Bank 
of Somalia (CBS), but three banks are not yet operational.12 The total banking industry assets were at 
US$351 million as of September 2018.13 Most banks met the minimum capital requirement of US$7 
million. There are several MFIs operating in the country. However, as explained in box 2, the MFI industry 
remains unregulated. In 2015, the mobile phone penetration rate stood at 59 percent, and in 2017, some 
70 percent of Somalis with a mobile phone regularly used mobile money services, transacting for 
approximately US$2.7 billion per month—yet, mobile money remains unregulated.14 In 2011, the FGS 
passed the Central Bank of Somalia Act, which reinstated the CBS. In 2012, the FGS passed the Financial 
Institutions Law (FIL), which created a national framework for financial institution regulation and 
supervision by the CBS. However, the FIL only covered banks and MTBs, and there are plans currently 
underway to modernize the FIL. 
Box 2. Microfinance Industry in Somaliaa 
• 
The Somalia microfinance industry is currently unregulated. The 2012 FIL only recognizes commercial 
banks and MTBs as financial institutions which has left microfinance players in a legal vacuum. The FIL is 
to be amended and modernized during 2019. 
• 
Six major MFIs operate in Somalia either as affiliated subsidiaries of commercial banks or registered as 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). This includes MicroDahab, IBS Microfinance, Premier 
Microfinance, AMAL Microfinance, KAABA Microfinance, and Kaah International Microfinance Services 
(KIMS). Additionally, many local and international NGOs provide heavily subsidized microfinance 
products. Women are overrepresented as clients within the microfinance industry. MFIs lend both for 
business and private purposes. 
                                            
12 For more detailed information regarding Somali financial institutions kindly refer to annex 3. 
13 Central Bank of Somalia Quarterly Report, 2018. 
14 World Bank. 2017. Mobile Money Ecosystem in Somalia: Household Survey and Market Analysis. Washington, DC. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 119 
 
• 
Microfinance regional coverages differs by institution. Microfinance operators affiliated with commercial 
banks generally operate in the same regions as their parent institutions while NGO-based MFIs are 
usually concentrated in major urban centers such as Mogadishu, Hargeisa, Garowe, and Kismayo. 
• 
Asset sizes of MFI players in Somalia range from US$0.3 million to US$3 million. 
• 
MFIs provide services using Islamic financing instruments. The two most utilized financial instruments 
within the industry are Qardu Hassan (charity-based and often subsidized with donor money) and 
Murabaha (cost-plus). 
• 
Average microfinance loans currently stand at around US$1,000. Tenors are short, often less than a year. 
Note: a. Limited data are available on the financial condition of MFIs in Somalia. The data are based on World Bank. 
2017. Mobile Money Ecosystem in Somalia: Household Survey and Market Analysis. Washington, DC, and interviews 
by the task team with financial sector stakeholders in Somalia conducted in September 2018. 
13. 
An emerging trend in the sector is the consolidation of financial service operators into a few 
large companies, which deters competition from prospective entrants. Somali money transfer and 
MNOs have always been intertwined, but the rapid growth of mobile money has forced key players in the 
strategic sectors of banking and money transfer services to not only protect their market niche but also 
occupy new ones as well. They do so largely through mergers and alliances. There is also a growing trend 
of partnerships to facilitate international remittances directly to customers, resulting in large 
conglomerates and the crowding out of smaller MTBs. As a result, there is overlapping business interest 
ownership in the financial sector covering banking, microfinance, and mobile money. 
14. 
Limitations exist in financial, technical, and managerial capacity to implement targeted 
interventions to enhance provision of and access to basic financial and government services by 
individuals and businesses. Capacity improvements will take time to overcome, while the urgency of 
expanding access to basic services is increasing. Missing financial infrastructure and rules affecting the 
coverage, scope, and accessibility of credit information such as credit referencing or moveable collateral 
registries limit expansion of financial access.  
15. 
Providing a robust and verifiable government-recognized ID is among the most pressing 
priorities in Somalia at this time. A unique identifier linked to each transaction account, will help ensure 
that financial transactions can be more accurately tracked. This will enable scale-up of access to finance 
and other basic services for Somalis, including for women and vulnerable people in rural areas, and 
promote safe and orderly migration within and across Somalia’s borders. A robust digital ID system is also 
instrumental for improving the robustness of business registration and access to finance for MSMEs as 
implementation of a central registry for companies offers access to information ensuring transparency 
around who really owns and controls Somali companies which is useful in tackling AML/CFT risks.  
16. 
The FGS has already taken steps to enable the implementation of a digital ID system, although 
large gaps remain in the enabling environment and several risks will need to be addressed. A 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) dated May 23, 2018, was signed between the FGS Ministry of 
Interior, Federal Affairs, and Reconciliation (MoIFAR) acting through the Office of the President and 
National Database and Registration Authority (NADRA)15 of Pakistan for the development of a digital ID 
system, including the design and installation of data management systems for multiple foundational and 
functional IDs, skills, and knowledge transfer, and maintenance and support for one year. However, for 
                                            
15 https://www.nadra.gov.pk/. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 119 
 
the digital ID system to achieve its full potential, risks associated with, among others, exclusion, vendor 
lock-in, and potential misuse of the system will need to be appropriately addressed. In addition, Somalia 
currently lacks a robust legislative and regulatory framework to govern the implementation of a robust, 
inclusive, and responsible foundational ID system and has not yet set up a dedicated entity to oversee and 
manage the proposed digital ID system. Ensuring that the ID system rests on solid legal and institutional 
foundations will be critical for its ability to ensure that IDs are accessible for all, to protect users’ data and 
privacy, to build and maintain trust in the system, and to ensure its long-term sustainability.  
17. 
Addressing the multifaceted challenges of lack of access to basic services enabling economic 
opportunities for individuals and businesses requires approaches that are both innovative and flexible. 
First, lack of reliable identity documents and identity verification mechanisms, compounded by a lack of 
connectivity are important barriers to the efficient delivery of basic services by the Government and 
private sector service providers. The design and implementation strategy of the ID system will draw on, 
and adapt to the Somali context as needed, the latest international good practices and lessons learned 
from digital ID systems all around the globe. For example, to enable rapid take-up of the ID credentials 
and to make registration accessible for members of vulnerable populations, the project proposes to follow 
an ‘ecosystem’ approach for enrollment, leveraging private sector entities and local NGOs as enrollment 
agents. Second, there are spatial and gender disparities in access to basic financial and government 
services making credible demand assessments from final beneficiaries essential to ensure 
appropriateness of products or services and sustainability of investments. Addressing these specificities, 
as well as the challenges posed by the operating environment and all-round capacity weaknesses, the 
project proposes to set up dedicated entities to operate on a sustainable basis to expand access to 
services. Based on the Government’s policy commitments, these entities will be highly agile and use 
private sector governance principles in constructing sustainable and effective service delivery 
mechanisms supported by appropriate fiscal plans, financing instruments, and performance reporting 
tools. 
18. 
Digital technologies will remain critical in Somalia for the foreseeable future to help curb 
economic isolation and rapidly transform the way people, businesses, and the FGS communicates, 
transacts, and accesses information and services. The World Bank, in partnership with public and private 
digital stakeholders, launched the Digital Economy for Africa (DE4A) Initiative in April 2018.16 DE4A 
recognizes that traditional economic sectors of Africa are paving the way to new growth models with 
rising mobile phone penetration, improving broadband Internet, and growing use of mobile money—
unleashing new opportunities for people, businesses, and governments. As such, the project aims to build 
on the DE4A codified pillars for the development of an inclusive digital economy in Africa17 by making 
steady and incremental improvements on accomplishments delivered under the SCORE (P152241) and 
ICT Sector Support in Somalia (P152358) projects. The project achieves this by enhancing the linkage and 
synergy between digital developments and digitization of finance to support entrepreneurship and 
livelihoods. While the preceding projects set up the foundational infrastructure and platforms to kick-start 
the process of enabling economic opportunities and expanding access to basic financial and government 
services to support entrepreneurship and sustainable jobs (see box 3), this project leverages technology 
                                            
16 http://live.worldbank.org/digital-economy-africa. 
17 The DE4A conceptual framework includes the basic elements of the digital economy as a whole (a) a highly efficient digital 
infrastructure, (b) public digital platforms, (c) digital finance services, (d) digital and innovative entrepreneurship, and (e) digital 
skills. Progress must be made in each of these elements to develop relevant digital services for the growth of various sectors of 
the economy. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 119 
 
as an enabler and anchor to build and strengthen key institutions and financial market infrastructure and 
support efficient financial intermediation.  
Box 3. Building on the Accomplishments of Preceding Projects 
The SCORE (P152241) and ICT Sector Support (P152358) projects involve strengthening legal and regulatory 
foundations, institutional capacity, and financial and private sector development. This project makes a strategic 
shift from the two predecessor projects, as the Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods, and 
Entrepreneurship, Through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) is supporting the FGS to deliver on its commitments 
to improve robustness and expand coverage of key services enabling entrepreneurship and supporting livelihoods 
(digital ID, transaction accounts, KYC e-verification services, e-registration services for businesses, and 
interoperable retail payment services). Figure 2.1 in annex 2 provides additional details on the phased and 
iterative approach of implementing activities under the two predecessor projects. 
SCORE Project. This is a US$28.5 million investment lending operation running from May 2016 to June 2020. 
Under SCORE, the World Bank is helping build core financial and private sector foundations, concretely, the legal 
and regulatory framework, financial sector infrastructure, and institutional and enforcement capacity—all of 
which have effectively been absent. This has involved developing foundational legislation and priority functions 
of the CBS and the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MoCI) as follows: 
• 
Improving Somalia’s business climate through modernization of the 2012 FIL, passage of a modern 
Company Law, and a new Payment Systems and Insurance Act utilizing the IFC Public-Private Dialogue 
(PPD) platform as an instrument to hold constructive dialogue among the relevant stakeholders 
regarding the development and passage of these legislations.  
• 
Delivering a core banking and accounting system at the CBS to strengthen the operating environment 
from a fiscal agency point of view. 
• 
Supporting examination of the MTBs and providing on-the-job training for CBS staff in support of safe 
and low-cost remittance flows to Somalia and establishment of mobile money regulations. 
• 
Building a platform for engagement between the CBS and the financial services industry to drive national 
payment systems (NPS) developments to allow humanitarian assistance to be transferred more securely, 
improve FGS service delivery, and deepen financial sector intermediation.  
• 
For the FRC, a National Risk Assessment (NRA) has been initiated and once concluded will inform both a 
capacity-building program for the FRC and a national strategy to manage AML/CFT risks.  
SCORE Project is also contributing to the development of entrepreneurship and SMEs in support of the jobs 
agenda, by launching a US$5.5 million BDS program for entrepreneurs through the SMEF and mobilizing SME 
financing through the Somali Business Catalytic Fund (SBCF), which as of June 2018 has reached 82 firms, 
committed to disburse US$6.5 million (to be matched by the recipients) to SMEs in the agriculture, manufacturing, 
and fisheries sectors, and catalyzed the mobilization of further US$1.06 million in private financing from financial 
institutions. The SBCF was closed in January 2019, and SMEF will be phased out in April 2019. There is no overlap 
between the two MSME financing mechanisms under the SCORE and SCALED-UP largely because the SBCF 
bypassed financial intermediaries as it was operated as an SME matching grants scheme. 
ICT Sector Support project. This is a combined US$14 million investment lending operation running from 2015 to 
2020. Under the ICT Sector Support project, the World Bank has supported the passage of the Communications 
Act of 2017 and subsequent creation of the National Communications Authority (NCA). Other key 
accomplishments include the following: 
• 
Supported infrastructure such as a fiber-optic loop around Mogadishu which boosted Internet capacity 
for 26 FGS ministries in 15 different locations and establishing the first Internet Exchange Point. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 119 
 
• 
Supported the adoption of the National Numbering Plan and schedule of spectrum and licensing fees 
that will contribute to the National Treasury and are benchmarks linked to the Recurrent Cost and 
Reform Financing (RCRF) project (P167224). 
• 
Internet capacity was also acquired, and doubled recently, for the higher education sector, connecting 
10 Somali universities, for the higher education sector through the Somalia Research and Education 
Network (known as ‘SomaliREN’). This was done under a 20-year and 10-year pre-purchase of Internet 
bandwidth from the optical fiber operators in the form of an indefeasible right of use (IRU)18 contract. 
The IRU refers to the right to use a specific amount of capacity on the cable for the duration of the 
contract.  
• 
Supported the creation of around 40 communications rooms across the country. 
• 
Supported public/private dialogue between the operators, Internet service providers, and the FGS. This 
has stimulated investment in the information and communications technology (ICT) sector both from 
the private sector and from donor partners.  
• 
Provided support to a youth-owned and youth-led tech hub called ‘IRise’. It is one of the first tech hubs 
in Somalia aiming to promote innovation and increase access for support to local innovative 
entrepreneurs.  
Additionally, under the second phase of the ICT Sector Support project, an operational pilot is underway for 
making salary payments to civil servants, and for making humanitarian payments in areas affected by drought 
and flood, using mobile money bulk payments. 
19. 
To respond to the development challenges, effective coordination mechanisms among 
institutions are needed to improve performance and delivery of the most crucial services to overcome 
economic isolation and expand economic opportunities for individuals and businesses. Several 
institutions and stakeholders are to be involved if a harmonized policy framework and agenda to offer 
economic opportunities and enhance access to basic financial and government services is to be pursued. 
However, unclear mandates and structures, overlap of responsibilities, and lack of a shared strategy 
remain as key challenges, creating tensions, and delaying the decision-making process. In this regard, the 
project proposes to update and fill gaps in existing government policy frameworks and strategies 
pertaining to the financial and digital developments, particularly addressing gender gaps in sectoral 
strategies as well as those related to direct project interventions on digital ID enrollment, access to 
financial services, and operation of the MSME Financing Facility.19 This will include development of 
eligibility criteria for participation in the MSME Financing Facility by bank and nonbank financial 
institutions involving holistic assessments of factors ranging from fitness and propriety of owners, 
controllers, and managers of PFIs and final beneficiaries to assessing the capability of PFIs to credibly serve 
underfunded and underserved market segments and sectors including women and female-owned 
MSMEs.  
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
20. 
Alignment to the CPF (FY19–22). The project is anchored under the Somalia CPF for FY19–22 
(discussed by the Board in September 2018, Report No. 124734-SO), specifically Focus Area 2 (Restoring 
Economic Resilience and Opportunities). The CPF’s objective on increasing financial and digital access 
                                            
18 Indefeasible right of use (IRU) is a permanent contractual agreement, that cannot be undone, between the owners of a 
communications system and a customer of that system. 
19 The MSME Financing Facility refers to the entity to be set up by the FGS and mandated to manage the line of credit under the 
project. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 119 
 
directly relates to Somalia's National Development Plan (NDP) which sets out the country’s priorities for 
national recovery and development for 2017–2019, particularly on actions to address constraints faced 
by MSMEs. The NDP specifically highlights the importance of enhancing capacity building for the private 
sector, especially the MSMEs as one of the prerequisites for inclusive growth and employment creation.  
21. 
The project is also aligned with the 2018–2020 Financial Sector Roadmap developed by the CBS, 
in partnership with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank. The broad structure of 
financial sector reforms supported by the Financial Sector Roadmap is a key element of the ongoing IMF’s 
Staff Monitored Program (SMP). The roadmap integrates the process of defining and sequencing 
supported reforms along four pillars:20  
(a) 
Improving CBS capacity for core functions and organization in banking operations, and the 
licensing and supervision departments, as well as internal audit, and financial reporting and 
accounting.  
(b) 
Developing a payments system by establishing a national switch and Automated Transfer 
System (ATS) that will integrate a Real Time Gross Settlement System and Automated 
Clearing House (functionality onto a single platform with seamless links between the CBS, 
commercial banks, and mobile money. Other aspects relate to stabilizing MTB foreign 
banking relationships and minimizing risks in the mobile money sector.  
(c) 
Strengthening legal and regulatory frameworks by modernizing the FIL and other laws to 
improve the legal basis for provision of financial services as well as CBS regulation and 
supervision of the financial system that is consistent with internationally accepted practice. 
(d) 
Developing the financial infrastructure to support efficient intermediation and to support 
collateralized lending and mitigate credit risk. 
22. 
Division of labor between the World Bank and IMF around the 2018–2020 Financial Sector 
Roadmap is such that IMF takes the lead on aspects related to Pillar (a) above while the World Bank takes 
the lead in Pillars (b), (c), and (d) with some of the support already in progress under the SCORE Project 
(P152241). In Pillar (a), the World Bank has supported the implementation of the core banking and 
accounting system and helped to kick-start MTB onsite and offsite examinations.  Moreover, the project 
is being implemented in close partnership with other key development partners supporting the 
Government’s wide-ranging reform agenda which relates to the broader objective of IFI normalization 
through the HIPC framework. 
23. 
The project also supports the Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD) agenda by creating 
and expanding markets for private sector investment to maximize development results. The project 
supports the setting up of a digital ID system using the ID4D principles and targets entrepreneurship and 
MSME access to financial services with a new apex institution set up to leverage private capital, when it 
is ready and forthcoming. To crowd-in investment capital from private sector sources, the new apex 
                                            
20 Figure 2.2 in annex 2 provides additional details on the broad structure of the financial sector road map and the connections 
across the four key pillars.  The road map and its four key pillars acting as the coordinating vehicle between the World Bank, 
IMF and other development partners in supporting CBS and other key institutions to financial sector development in a joined-
up manner that takes into account the comparative advantages of each supporting institution. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 119 
 
institution is structured on private sector principles and will benefit from a range of blending tools 
consisting 
of 
supporting 
instruments 
that 
enable 
channeling 
of 
core 
equity 
and/or 
subordinated/mezzanine debt to help attain far greater leverage of public funds (relative to more typical 
approaches to MSME financing), in line with the MFD approach.  The project also will support the FGS to 
stabilize core government institutions that are key to the provision of services enabling economic 
opportunities for individuals and businesses, and to create legislative and institutional framework 
enabling financial and digital development. All these activities are essential preconditions or critical 
enablers for leveraging private capital.  
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
A. Project Development Objective 
24. 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support progress towards increased access to 
basic digital financial and government services targeting entrepreneurship and employment, 
particularly for women. The Theory of Change is depicted in the Results Chain in section II.D.   
25. 
Achievement of PDO will be measured by the following indicators: 
• 
Number of people who have received their unique ID number, of which (%) are female 
• 
Number of people accessing financial services using their digital ID, of which (%) are female 
• 
Number of firms that benefit from reformed business registration requirements, of which 
(%) are female-owned 
• 
Value of MSME loans from the MSME Financing Facility (US$), of which (%) are female-
owned 
• 
Jobs created by firms that access the MSME Financing Facility, of which (%) are for females, 
and of which (%) sustainable jobs21  
B. Project Components 
26. 
The project has three components, which are summarized in this section (see annex 2 for 
detailed description). The project adopts a highly graduated and integrated approach that is well-adapted 
to the country context. Initially, the project focuses on establishing an enabling legal and regulatory 
                                            
21 Sustainable jobs are referred to as paid direct full-time equivalent (FTE) lasting a minimum of six months created by SMEs 
who have accessed the line of credit (microloans are assumed to support livelihoods of final beneficiaries and not generate new 
jobs). Jobs lasting less than one month (or less than 20 days excluding weekends) are not counted to emphasize those jobs that 
provide more stability through length. Jobs should be converted to FTE. One FTE equals 260 days (excluding weekends) or 12 
months. Thus, a job that lasts 4 months should be counted as 1/3 FTE and a job that lasts for 130 days (excluding weekends) 
should be counted as 1/2 FTE. Number of hours worked per day or per week is not restricted as work hours may vary greatly. 
Furthermore, Jobs must be formalized with a written employment contract. Lastly, relevance is not placed on remuneration 
scale for jobs created as there is no regulated minimum wage in Somalia. (For the definition of sustainable jobs, SCALED-UP has 
chosen to employ a tested model utilized by USAID for its ongoing Growth, Enterprise, Employment, and Livelihoods [GEEL] 
project in Somalia). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 119 
 
environment for financial and digital development. The project then focuses on stabilizing core 
institutions and their governance as preconditions for enabling access to basic inclusive financial and 
government services that offer economic opportunities and expand provision of sustainable jobs. 
Subsequently, project focus shifts to expanding the coverage and number of service users. 
27. 
At the core of the project is the establishment of two specialized Somali entities. The first entity 
will administer a digital ID system and the second will be an apex MSME Financing Facility to manage a 
line of credit that the project will make available to eligible financial institutions. The project will provide 
initial funding to the two institutions with IDA and donor financing. In the case of the MSME Financing 
Facility, it would be subsequently opened to sequential private sector investing and shareholding through 
follow-on fund-raising. In this way, the MSME Financing Facility represents the first step in creating a 
Somali entity with a commercial orientation that can act as a platform to crowd-in additional investments 
of private capital from international sources, including development finance institutions (DFIs), thereby 
fostering financial sector development, financial inclusion while sustaining the most dynamic MSMEs and 
provision of jobs, in a capital-constrained environment. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 119 
 
Figure 1. Components of the Project 
 
  
  
Component 1: Strengthening Institutions (SDR 5 million, US$7 million equivalent)  
28. 
This component is focused on stabilizing core government functions enabling access to services 
for individuals and businesses. This is a reform area requiring progress across multiple ministries, 
departments, and agencies (MDAs) in several areas. This is intended to strengthen governance and 
institutional effectiveness thereby contributing to building state legitimacy and improving citizens’ trust 
in institutions. The key areas covered by this component are as follows: (a) support to the CBS on 
improving financial institutions regulations and supervision, promoting efficient financial intermediation 
and strengthening policies and strategies for digital financial services and expanding financial access; (b) 
support to the FRC on enhancing its understanding of Somalia’s AML/CFT risks, analyzing financial 
intelligence, and disseminating reports to LEAs as appropriate; (c) support to the Ministry of Posts, 
Telecommunications, and Technology (MPTT)/NCA to strengthen policy development and effective 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 119 
 
regulation of the ICT sector; and (d) support to the MoIFAR to create the legislative and institutional 
enabling environment for the digital ID system, including the setup and operationalization of a new 
dedicated ID Authority.  
29. 
The project proposes to support regulatory technology (RegTech) solutions for financial 
reporting by financial institutions and communications service providers to regulatory agencies and 
rigorous data analysis thereby improving the effectiveness of institutions. The objective is to use 
RegTech to drive improved and timely regulatory reporting by regulated entities to ensure that they are 
accurately reporting their financial condition and performance, combined with strengthened 
management information systems (MIS) used by the regulators for collecting, managing, and analyzing 
financial data from regulated entities. This will help regulators rigorously assess risks and build robust 
cases for possible follow up actions. As such, the RegTech solutions will be aligned with principles around 
data privacy and confidentiality. Other important considerations in the implementation of RegTech 
solutions will include (a) business modelling to ensure financial sustainability and affordability; (b) 
operations and technology governance to guarantee convenience and security for data collection, 
transfer, exchange, and storage; (c) interoperability and interconnection considerations, including a 
review of application programing interface or web services to be created to provide the interface for 
reporting entities and how this is to be secured; and (d) the policies, standards, guidelines, and 
frameworks needed to guarantee a resilient, open and flexible technology solution offering rigorous 
analytical capability, protection of data privacy, and control of regulatory processes. Alongside support to 
the MDAs, the Attorney General’s Office will be critical to the development of legal and regulatory reform 
packages. As such, incidental capacity-building support will be provided to the Attorney General’s Office 
on technical drafting of laws and regulations related to this project. 
30. 
This component includes a focus on support for building a robust ID enabling environment, 
including the adoption of comprehensive policy and legislative frameworks and the establishment of a 
competent and well-governed digital ID Authority (for a detailed sequence of activities refer to table 2.1 
in annex 2). Although under the MOU signed by the FGS and NADRA in 2018, NADRA is expected to provide 
the technical components—for example, software and hardware—for the digital ID system, critical 
legislative and institutional gaps will need to be addressed to ensure the system’s successful 
implementation. Building a robust legislative and institutional foundation for the digital ID system is 
critical for mitigating the risk of misuse, building the trust needed in the new system to achieve high 
coverage and use, and ensuring long-term sustainability. The support for a comprehensive legal 
framework will help the FGS to, among others, define the basic purposes of the ID system, establish and 
specifying the mandate, governance arrangements, and functions of the ID Authority, and lay out key 
system features and principles, such as those related to registration processes, credential issuance, 
system interoperability, and the use of identity verification and authentication mechanisms for financial 
service providers and beyond. It will also facilitate the adoption of appropriate policies related to data 
protection, the rights of data subjects over their data, and cybersecurity, among others. This component 
will also support the setup of a dedicated and competent ID Authority—operating with legal, institutional, 
and financial independence—to provide identification services. To ensure that it operates in an inclusive 
manner and that it remains responsive to a broad set of user needs, the ID Authority’s governance 
structures will aim to include representatives of users and a wide range of stakeholders, including from 
both the private and public sectors. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 119 
 
31. 
Activities to be financed will include provision of goods, consultancy services, capacity building, 
training, and workshops for carrying out implementation activities supporting policy makers, 
regulators, and supervisors, and other beneficiaries and stakeholders. These activities will enable the 
FGS to (a) develop and implement effective sector policies and strategies and legal and regulatory 
frameworks; (b) strengthen regulatory reporting, compliance, and transaction monitoring through the use 
of regulatory technology (RegTech) tools; (c) implement shared IT systems and related utility services for 
identification verification as well as fraud detection and control; and (d) improve business processes and 
streamline workflows. 
Component 2: Enabling Financial and Digital Services (SDR 14.3 million, US$20 million equivalent) 
32. 
This component focuses on increasing individuals’ and businesses’ access to services that 
expand economic opportunities and help restore resilience in a gender-sensitive manner. Under this 
component, the project will support sustainable mechanisms for service delivery. In addition, the project 
will encourage a gender-sensitive approach to the delivery of targeted services and promote the 
development of gender-sensitive sector policies and strategies to help address the gender gaps identified. 
Areas covered by the component are as follows:  
(a) 
Setting up the MSME Financing Facility as a dedicated apex institution providing financing to 
bank and nonbank financial institutions, with implementation support from the World Bank. 
Discussions have also been held with IFC to engage in supporting implementation of the 
facility (see annex 2). The entity will follow private sector management and governance 
principles, as well as embed AML/CFT controls in accordance with the Financial Action Task 
Force (FATF) standards. Eligible financial institutions will be those which are appraised by 
the MSME Financing Facility and meet World Bank Group policies as well as other risk 
considerations (including environmental and social [E&S] safeguards and AML/CFT risk 
controls).  
(b) 
Digital ID enrollment for at least the first one million registrants, including dedicated support 
for outreach to the poorer and marginalized groups, and support for the use of the digital ID 
for increased financial access through more accurate identity verification and authentication 
mechanisms available to, among others, mobile money companies, banks, and MTBs.  
(c) 
Government digital payments, construction of interoperable retail payments services, and 
integrated Government digital services thereby contributing to strengthened systems for 
revenue mobilization and expenditure management in an increasingly coherent federal 
government structure for service delivery.  
(d) 
e-business registration services for SMEs through operationalization of one-stop shop (OSS), 
thereby enabling access to a centralized information service to verify the identity of the 
beneficial owners of all legal entities operating in Somalia. The digital business registration 
services would also enable CDD as a pillar of an effective AML/CFT program by financial 
service providers operating in Somalia as well as the MSME Financing Facility set up under 
the project. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 119 
 
33. 
The MSME Financing Facility will be set up as a dedicated and autonomous Somali body to 
ensure long-term sustainability. The entity will be initially publicly funded using IDA financing but would 
be structured to operate through private sector management and governance principles and with the 
provision to allow transition toward private sector majority shareholding over time. To avoid crowding-
out private sector financing, any subsidy component in the pricing will be explicit and transparent and will 
be gradually phased out to build a commercial market segment for lending to MSMEs in underserved 
market segments.  
34. 
The MSME Financing Facility will be supported by the World Bank Group to build its operational 
capacity and establish credibility in the market. The project will also help protect the integrity of the 
institution by requiring the MSME Financing Facility to operate in accordance with World Bank-reviewed 
appraisal procedures and standards as a condition of the IDA Grant Agreement and the World Bank 
project agreement. The World Bank Group implementation support to the MSME Financing Facility will 
indirectly help build capacity to improve the quality of subproject loan applications prepared by the 
participating financial institutions (PFIs). This is because the MSME Financing Facility will adopt an MSME 
Subproject Manual developed with World Bank Group assistance. The key design elements of the MSME 
Subproject Manual will ensure (a) access to finance by MSMEs in underserved economic segments, 
especially women and female-owned businesses and (b) clarity, transparency, and administrative 
efficiency in MSME Financing Facility appraisal operations under a single institution using a single MSME 
Subproject Manual. 
35. 
The project will support the MSME Financing Facility to develop the institutional capacity to 
screen, appraise, and supervise funded subprojects. This will involve supporting the MSME Financing 
Facility to manage its operations on a sustainable basis; building capacity in PFIs and other relevant 
parties; developing standardized documents and procedures for PFIs to use in preparing subproject loan 
applications and requiring the use of such documents and procedures for subprojects to receive funding 
from the MSME Financing Facility; and supporting on-demand sub-loan preparation activities, including 
feasibility studies, transaction advisory support, and other activities that PFIs consider complex. The 
MSME Financing Facility will operate through two separate financing windows addressing different 
customer-facing channels and lines of business emphasizing the need to tailor the framework to an 
individual bank’s line of business structure, products, and priorities as follows: 
• 
A ‘large loans’ window to cover large loans to SMEs (large businesses). The eligibility criteria 
for borrowers would be flexible. However, informal companies would not be accepted. All 
advances will be in U.S. dollars and all types of credit would be eligible (working capital and 
investment loans), except trade finance. 
• 
A ‘micro and small loans’ window that would be open to SMEs, individuals, and groups. This 
will include informal small and microenterprises and groups with a commitment to formalize 
during the loan repayment period. All advances will be in U.S. dollars and all types of credit 
would be eligible (working capital and investment loans) except trade finance.  
36. 
The project will also support enrollment in the digital ID system of at least the first one million 
registrants. The project proposes to use an ecosystem approach to rapidly reach high volume and ensure 
the inclusion of vulnerable and marginalized populations such as women, internally displaced persons 
(IDPs), and persons living with disabilities. Under such an approach, public and private sector service 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 119 
 
providers, local NGOs, and entrepreneurs would also serve as registration agents and/or ID service 
partners. These stakeholders could also be engaged to raise awareness about the importance of obtaining 
an ID and could play an active role in designing key features of the ID system itself. To develop an inclusive 
and collaborative enrollment strategy, the project will build on early analytical work22 delivered advising 
the Somali authorities on good practices and will facilitate consultations with the private sector, civil 
society, and humanitarian agencies. The FGS can draw on lessons from previous biometric registration 
efforts by WFP and other humanitarian organizations and should explore ways to leverage their existing 
network of registration partners for enrollment and ID service provision related to the new digital ID 
system. The planned project activities also include the preparation of a social management plan to address 
risks of exclusion as well as a comprehensive outreach and communications strategy to be completed 
before the rollout of the digital ID system to ensure the ID system’s accessibility for women and other 
vulnerable populations, such as persons with disabilities. Collaboration with humanitarian organizations 
can also be valuable in this context, because they have considerable experience of serving vulnerable 
communities across the country and can provide guidance on outreach strategies as well as the 
implementation of an effective project-level grievance redress mechanism (GRM). 
37. 
Activities to be financed will include provision of goods, capacity building, training, workshops, 
and consultancy services to support stocktaking exercises; implementation of interoperability measures 
including data exchange protocols, and scheme regulations and rules; procedural reforms, process 
reengineering, simplified forms and documentation, and digital ID enrollment services; and citizen 
engagement, consultation, and communication campaigns on delivery of robust and sustainable financial 
and digital services. 
Component 3: Project Management and Coordination (SDR 2.9 million, US$4 million equivalent)  
38. 
The component will fund project management and coordination activities. The project will be 
implemented by the FGS using a single Project Implementation Unit (PIU) anchored in the Ministry of 
Finance (MoF) in Mogadishu, with a multilayer implementation and oversight structure. The PIU will be 
responsible for day-to-day project management and will coordinate closely with MDAs covering the 
project target areas. The PIU will also coordinate activities across the FGS including Federal Member States 
(FMS). Project focal persons will be appointed and embedded within MDAs covering project target areas. 
The project will set up a single Project Steering Committee (PSC) comprising the key MDAs to coordinate 
and oversee the implementation of activities, with attention to sequencing and timing issues, as well as 
ensuring effective stakeholder consultations and engagements. The project will also fund an independent 
monitoring agent to provide an added layer of physically monitoring the flow and use of project funds, 
including the MSME Financing Facility. In addition, funding will be allocated to establish a project-level 
GRM.  Activities to be financed by this component will include provision of goods, consulting services, 
training, and operating costs of the PIU to support project coordination, implementation, monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E), and management. 
                                            
22 See: World Bank. 2018. Toward a Robust, Inclusive and Responsible Digital ID System in Somalia. Washington, DC: The World 
Bank Group; World Bank. 2016. Toward a Somali Identification System: ID4D Diagnostic. Washington, DC: The World Bank.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 119 
 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
39. 
Direct beneficiaries of the project will be the residents of Somalia, especially women and female 
owners of MSMEs, who will benefit from more formalization and growth in economic participation. 
Women and female owners of MSMEs will derive direct benefit from improved access to financial services 
through ownership of transaction accounts enabled by the digital ID system and from the MSME Financing 
Facility. In addition, all those enrolled in the digital ID system and issued a unique ID number will benefit 
from greater access to financial services by having a robust and verifiable official proof of identity. ID 
holders, of which 50 percent are expected to be women, will also be more able to participate in the formal 
economy more broadly and capitalize on economic opportunities arising, for example, from greater 
freedom of movement, as facilitated by the digital ID system.  
40. 
Other beneficiaries of this project will be FGS institutions that are key to delivery of targeted 
financial and digital services. These include the MoF, MoIFAR, MoCI, MPTT, CBS, FRC, NCA, a new 
dedicated ID Authority, and the newly created MSME Financing Facility. Banks and nonbank financial 
institutions participating in the MSME Financing Facility will also directly benefit from the strengthened 
capacity to provide MSME banking and conduct E&S assessments. The project would enable delivery of 
support across FMS depending on the readiness of the states. 
41. 
More broadly, a more robust and inclusive financial and digital ecosystem will benefit the entire 
Somali population including the economic empowerment of women. This is accomplished by helping the 
FGS with clear policies and specific strategies, plans, and road maps to help ‘leapfrog’ a few development 
steps and effectively respond to the demands of the domestic economy for robust and inclusive financial 
and Government services enabled by highly efficient digital infrastructure and an enabling institutional, 
legal, and regulatory framework.  
42. 
In addition, the MSME Financing Facility will benefit financial institutions and the market at 
large through possible links with DFIs attracting additional capital overtime. The MSME Financing Facility 
is expected to result in (a) the upstream benefit of raising the standards of subproject preparation by PFIs 
and (b) the downstream benefit of providing financing to MSMEs based on transparent appraisal of 
subproject risks and viability as well as eligibility criteria and realization of the Government’s commitment 
to financial inclusion targeting access to marginalized groups including women and female-owned 
MSMEs.  
43. 
Over time, once a track record is established, the MSME Financing Facility may raise funds from 
private investors and DFIs. To crowd-in investment capital from private sector sources, the MSME 
Financing Facility is expected to benefit from a range of blending tools consisting of core equity (with the 
FGS accepting a high-risk for a relatively low return) and/or subordinated/mezzanine debt (with the FGS 
accepting first losses ahead of private creditors/investors). In this way, private investors (such as DFIs 
when they can invest further down the line) will be afforded the opportunity to achieve better returns at 
lower risk than other core equity shareholders such as the FGS, to the extent that they can provide finance 
and achieve additionality. Equity and subordinate instruments will also help attain leverage of public 
funds, in line with the MFD approach.  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 119 
 
D. Results Chain  
 
Note: The list of activities, outputs, and outcomes are not all inclusive. Component 3 (Project Management and 
Coordination) is excluded because it primarily relates to administrative activities and does not directly contribute 
to the PDO and intermediate indicators. 
Impact 
Outcomes 
Outputs 
Activities  
Component 1: Strengthening Institutions 
 
•
Support to policy makers, regulators, and supervisors 
of key institutions for effective policies and 
strategies; adoption of robust and comprehensive 
legal and regulatory frameworks; and sustainable 
mechanisms for service delivery 
•
Regulatory technology (RegTech) solutions for 
regulatory reporting, compliance and transaction 
monitoring, shared ID and KYC utility services, and 
fraud detection and control 
Increased access to basic digital financial and government services 
targeting entrepreneurship and employment, particularly for women 
Outcomes 
•
Increased business and consumer confidence in 
decisions made by regulators and supervisors 
•
Strengthened institutional capacity, transparency, 
and accountability of regulators and supervisors 
•
Improved enabling environment for financial and 
digital developments  
Component 2: Enabling Financial and Digital Services 
 
•
Support to the MoF for the establishment of the MSME 
Financing Facility 
•
Capacity building and TA (E&S Safeguards) for PFIs to 
access MSME Financing Facility 
•
Support for digital ID enrollment and effective use for 
financial sector applications 
•
Operationalization of infrastructure developed under 
previous projects; creating sustainable mechanisms of 
service delivery for e-business registration and links to 
tax, and ID services under OSS process for MSMEs, 
Outcomes 
•
Increased access to financial services for targeted 
beneficiaries and sectors 
•
Additional private capital mobilized by PFIs 
•
Improved ownership of transaction accounts enabled by 
digital ID and/or business registry 
Increased competition in markets and reconfiguration of 
the financial and digital communications sector to 
improve service delivery 
Increased capacity for businesses to innovate, adopt new 
technologies and adapt products and processes to meet 
market needs 
Component 1: Strengthening Institutions 
(Key institutions = CBS, FRC, NCA/MPTT, ID admin body) 
 
(a) Support on main functions for key institutions: 
•
Digital ID Authority legally established and functional 
•
NCA functional and issues strong policies and 
effective regulations to communications service 
providers 
•
CBS reorganized and regulators/supervisors 
trained/certified 
•
Strengthened risk assessment capacity for FRC 
through case-based system for management of 
AML/CFT risks 
•
Operational and sustainability business plans 
developed by the CBS, FRC, NCA, and new ID 
Authority to assist MoF fiscal planning 
•
Interagency coordination body established 
 (b) Regulatory technology solutions implemented: 
•
Digitization of regulatory reporting and examinations 
Component 2: Enabling Financial and Digital Services 
 
(a) Line of Credit/MSME Financing Facility: 
•
Dedicated and autonomous MSME Financing Facility 
established using private sector management and 
governance principles 
•
PFIs access MSME Financing Facility for on-lending to 
target sectors/beneficiaries 
(b) Digital ID for financial access: 
•
Accessible digital ID system operational and enabled for 
use in the financial sector, including for mobile 
money/SIM card registration, banks, and MTBs 
(c) e-Registration Services for SMEs: 
•
One-stop shop (OSS) operational for e-business 
registration, tax, and ID services based at the MoCI 
(d) Government and Retail Payment Services: 
•
National Payment Systems Committee established 
•
Payment systems interoperable for mobile money 
platforms and interbank payments 
Communities and businesses facing access barriers to capital sources/international financial system 
Domestic digital and physical infrastructure gap limiting connectivity and trade 
Market failures related to information asymmetries in access to finance 
Development  
Challenge 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 119 
 
E. Rationale for World Bank Group Involvement and Role of Partners 
44. 
The World Bank Group brings extensive international experiences in all components of the 
project. This includes World Bank-supported interventions establishing digital ID systems, establishing 
dedicated entities to manage lines of credit, strengthening central banks, Financial Intelligence Units 
(FIUs), ICT regulators, and promoting access to finance for MSMEs around the world. The World Bank 
Group also brings strong analytical expertise underpinning reforms and informing decisions and 
investments. Rigorous diagnostics and studies will continuously feed the project implementation. The 
proposed M&E Results Framework will generate evidence-based findings that will inform future 
interventions and adjustments to support financial sector and digital developments in Somalia and 
beyond. 
45. 
The MSME Financing Facility is designed to support initial stages of mobilizing investments of 
private capital in underserved economic sectors in Somalia. The strategic rationale for the World Bank 
and proposed IFC supporting the setup of the MSME Financing Facility is two-fold:  
(a) 
By helping the MSME Financing Facility establish credible appraisal standards and other 
operational and institutional procedures and codifying them in the MSME Subproject 
Manual (which includes the E&S safeguards assessments), the World Bank and IFC can help 
the facility demonstrate that its appraisal standards are of a high standard and its 
institutional integrity is protected by the FGS-World Bank agreements under the project.  
(b) 
World Bank and the proposed IFC support to the MSME Financing Facility can contribute to 
improved quality of loans provided to MSMEs by PFIs. This is because PFIs will use the IFC 
implementation TA23 to inform improvements in credit risk policies used in the evaluation of 
loan applications seeking funding support from the MSME Financing Facility. Leveraging IFC 
experience in this regard will be critical for the MSME Financing Facility as it will signal to the 
market that the quality of its appraisal standards, governance and other internal controls 
are high. 
46. 
The World Bank has the convening power to bring to Somalia technical expertise, best practices, 
and lessons learned from around the world. The World Bank Group has unique advantages to convene 
both public and private stakeholders and local, national, and global levels of expertise at all the stages of 
the project. In 2014, the World Bank established the Identification for Development (ID4D) program, 
which provides dedicated support on the design and implementation of digital identification systems, 
building on a growing body of evidence and good practices from across the globe. ID4D will provide 
specialized expertise for strengthening the enabling environment and mass registration for the digital ID 
system, including through providing practical advice from members of ID4D’s Technical Expert Group. 
47. 
The project builds upon experiences and accomplishments of SCORE (P152241) and ICT Sector 
Support in Somalia Phase II (P152358) projects. These operations involve strengthening legal and 
regulatory foundations, institutional capacity, and financial and telecommunications infrastructure. 
                                            
23 See annex 4, box 4.1 for a description of IFC’s Financial Institutions Development Program (FIDEP) (ID: 602159) currently 
under preparation.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 119 
 
Several proposed activities are incremental improvements that scale up past accomplishments (see box 
2). 
48. 
The project is closely linked to the World Bank’s project - Somali Electricity Access Project (SEAP, 
P165497, approved by the Board in December 2018). SEAP’s objective is to expand electricity access in 
targeted urban, peri-urban, and rural communities in Somalia. SEAP is expected to increase access to 
affordable and reliable renewable energy services for households and small businesses by incentivizing 
private companies in the off-grid solar photovoltaic sector to enhance their business operations and reach 
currently untargeted populations. SEAP will leverage the MSME Financing Facility under the project to 
support MSMEs within the renewable energy value chain as one of its target sectors. It is expected that 
MSMEs supported under SEAP will also be strong candidates for commercial financing under the MSME 
Financing Facility. 
49. 
The project complements other development partner programs addressing access to financial 
and digital services in Somalia. The MSME Financing Facility will act as a vehicle through which the FGS, 
DFIs, and other donors could channel additional funds to build up market-based financial intermediation 
at the lower end of the financial sector. In this way, the MSME Financing Facility helps the FGS (a) 
coordinate donor funding to the poorest segment of financial services customers, thereby avoiding 
possible duplication of efforts and distortion of markets; (b) kick-start MSME banking in key underserved 
service and productive sectors by supporting the PFIs to scale up rapidly and become sustainable; and (c) 
build sustainable mechanisms for advancing market-based financial intermediation by instilling a 
commercial orientation to MSME banking by PFIs supporting the lower end of the financial sector. On the 
financial intermediation front, there are two main donor programs in operation that the project will 
closely coordinate with: (a) Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency Partial Guarantee, 
and; (b) Nordic Horn of Africa Fund. On the TA side, USAID’s Growth, Enterprise, Employment, and 
Livelihoods (GEEL) Project is working to develop a few selected agricultural product value chains by 
providing specialized technical support. The MSME Financing Facility introduces private sector orientation 
and MFD-enabling dimensions to the financial intermediation interventions. This is very much part of the 
institution building agenda and value addition envisaged with possible involvement of IFC in provision of 
implementation support. On the energy side, the World Bank developed a study in cooperation with 
Lighting Africa on ‘Market Assessment of the Off-grid Solar Lighting Sector in Somalia’ that was completed 
in March 2018 and helps to uncover the market demand for off-grid systems.  
50. 
On the digital ID side, the project is supporting the FGS to set up a foundational digital ID 
together with the institutional and legal framework. This provides an opportunity for the FGS to leverage 
the lessons learned from previous registration experience of humanitarian agencies such as the WFP for 
achieving high coverage and ensuring the robustness of the foundational digital ID. The World Bank has 
developed two studies in cooperation with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) which 
suggests pathways to building robust digital ID system in Somalia. The first of these (‘Toward a Somali 
Identification System: ID4D Diagnostic’) had been completed in 2016, and the second (‘Toward a Robust, 
Inclusive and Responsible Digital ID System in Somalia’) was completed in June 2018.  
51. 
On enhancing the integrity of financial markets, the project builds on the NRA delivered under 
the SCORE Project (P152241) and supplements support provided by other developing partners. The U.S. 
State Department has been providing some support to the FRC and CBS in the form of AML/CFT mentors 
and capacity building as well as improving physical security of FRC premises, while the IMF has been 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 119 
 
engaged in the financial sector, through a legal review of CFT laws and regulations, and with the CBS 
mainly through the SMP. The European Union has been channeling support jointly with UNDP to the 
justice sector through the Joint Justice Program which is being implemented by UNDP. The program 
foresees capacity building to the Attorney General’s Office, including the possible establishment of 
specialized units to deal with cases relating to juveniles, gender-based violence (GBV), or corruption.  
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
52. 
The following lessons learned from similar projects in Somalia as well as from other 
international experiences were considered in the design of the project: 
• 
Fragile security situation. Operating in a fragile and conflict-affected country and all-around 
capacity weaknesses affects the project both in terms of the safety of staff and contractors, 
as well as implementation time lines of project activities and budgets due to high costs of 
client hand-holding efforts and challenging logistics within the country. Client absorptive 
capacity will be continually assessed and interventions carefully calibrated. Similarly, the 
security situation will continually be assessed. ‘Duty of Care’ responsibilities will be upheld 
always to ensure the health, safety, security, and well-being of all staff and contractors. The 
project will maintain high level of planning and coordination of activities on an ongoing basis 
and adjust as needed to achieve successful project activities and outcomes. 
• 
Fiscal sustainability. Somalia is highly fiscally constrained meaning the adoption of new 
budgetary units should be treated with caution and managed carefully in coordination with 
the MoF. The project adopts the following measures: (a) Government financing: to ensure 
sustainability, solution selection will be based on confirmation of adequate sources of funds 
needed to meet operations and maintenance costs of completed service facilities, and; (b) 
stakeholder participation: stakeholder participation is crucial in solution identification and 
preparation and in securing stakeholder contributions in cash or kind. Local ownership of 
completed service facilities would also provide additional assurance of subsequent 
sustainability of operations and maintenance. Moreover, while the structure of the MSME 
Financing Facility is initially publicly financed, the intent is to transition to majority private 
sector shareholding over time and use public capital to private leverage funding which 
contributes to fiscal sustainability in the medium term. 
• 
Autonomous project management and staff competency. There is a need for highly 
efficient project management capacity that can cope with many beneficiary MDAs and 
management of the MSME Financing Facility. The management of the MSME Financing 
Facility will use private sector governance principles covering an independent board of 
directors, an outside advisory panel, and recruitment of competent management staff 
through open competition. 
• 
Risk mitigation through a phased and iterative approach to project implementation and 
institutional reform, based on technical assessments. The first phase of the project will 
support the building of the enabling policy, legal, and regulatory frameworks and the setting 
up of the specialized entities. This will be followed by efforts to scale up access to the basic 
services targeted by the project. Iterative technical assessments will be essential to ensure 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 119 
 
healthy and sustained delivery of services beyond the life cycle of the project through the 
provision of technical experts and more complete and relevant analytical work on 
sustainable business models. In all cases, project support will ensure transparency and 
accountability on all procurements and financial governance issues. This will be aimed at 
affording the FGS the opportunity to generate a complete evidence base and information 
needed to renegotiate unfavorable contract terms and/or correct technical weaknesses or 
gaps in service facilities or business model sustainability including addressing cybersecurity 
risks. 
• 
E&S safeguards mitigation. During the selection of subprojects, strict screening of E&S 
safeguards is necessary, which will also determine investment needs to provide appropriate 
mitigation measures. 
53. 
The design of the MSME Financing Facility is based on lessons learned from across similar 
financial sector development projects offering lines of credit. The MSME Financing Facility is intended to 
serve as a stepping stone that facilitates the adoption of traditional lending by Somali financial institutions 
and create sufficient scale of market-based funding to MSMEs in nontraditional sectors which generally 
have difficulties accessing finance. The MSME Financing Facility target sectors include energy and 
livestock. Lessons were drawn from previous World Bank projects in Afghanistan (ARTF-Microfinance 
[P091264]), Indonesia (Indonesia Infrastructure Guarantee Fund Project [P118916]), Yemen (Yemen 
Emergency Electricity Access Project [P163777]), Rwanda (Rwanda Housing Finance Project [P165649]), 
Kenya (Kenya Affordable Housing Finance Project [P165034]) and Pakistan (Pakistan Housing Financing 
Project [P162095]) whereby public funding created the market opportunities while operations were on 
private sector principles and in some cases, with an enabling provision to allow private sector participation 
and majority shareholding over time. This was confirmed in the Letter of Policy Commitments from the 
Prime Minister, dated January 22, 2019 (see annex 6). As such, the charter for the MSME Financing Facility 
will create a domestic Somali entity with a commercial orientation that can act as a platform and benefit 
from blending tools to crowd-in additional private and public financing from other sources including DFIs. 
It also creates a revolving fund able to create sufficient scale through multiple financing rounds. This will 
help to gain trust and reduce the risk perceived by lenders in MSMEs sectors and by private investors in 
Somali financial institutions. 
54. 
The project also draws on lessons learned from other ID projects and on the wealth of analytical 
and global convening work on identification by the World Bank’s ID4D program. The 10 Principles on 
Identification for Sustainable Development, which have been endorsed by over 24 development partners, 
United Nations agencies, and private sector organizations, synthesize lessons learned from around the 
globe about maximizing the benefits of identification systems for development while mitigating important 
risks. The proposed digital ID system’s design and implementation strategy will be aligned with the 
Principles, including with regard to the accessibility of the system, the adoption of robust, secure, 
responsive, and sustainable system features and technologies, and governance arrangements that 
facilitate trust and help protect privacy and user rights. This was confirmed in the Letter of Policy 
Commitments from the Prime Minister, dated January 22, 2019 (see annex 6). To this end, the ID Authority 
will include representatives of users and a wide range of stakeholders, including from both the private 
and public sectors within its governance structures such as its board. A public entity with a dedicated 
mandate for ID service provision and with legal, institutional, and financial independence will be more 
likely to operate in an inclusive and efficient manner, to be responsive to user needs, and build up public 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 119 
 
trust due to its greater perceived political neutrality. To be able to effectively implement the digital ID 
system, the ID Authority will also need to have sufficient capacity, including capable and dedicated staff, 
to manage large-scale registration efforts, safeguard the integrity of identity data, and ensure integration 
of the ID into service delivery.  
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
55. 
The project will adopt a layered and inclusive project oversight structure to ensure coordination 
among different participating government stakeholders. The MoF will be the executing agency of the 
project. The project will set up a single Project Steering Committee (PSC). The PSC, headed by the MoF 
with representatives from the MoCI, MPTT, MoIFAR, CBS, FRC, NCA, and the new ID Authority, will provide 
policy guidance and monitor the progress through the Secretariat, represented by the Director General in 
the MoF. The FGS can make changes in the membership composition of the PSC or its terms of reference 
(TOR) in consultation with IDA. Furthermore, the MoF will appoint an independent board of directors in 
accordance with the charter of the MSME Financing Facility. In turn, the board of directors will appoint a 
competent management and investment committee selected through a clearly defined TORs and criterion 
which are set out on the Project Operations Manual (POM) including an annex MSME Subproject Manual. 
The FGS will submit to IDA for review and clearance the proposed charter of the MSME Financing Facility, 
TORs for the board of directors and management, job descriptions for directors/staff proposed to be 
recruited, and MSME Subproject Manual. 
56. 
The existing SCORE Project (P152241) PIU in the MoF, created in 2016, will implement the 
project. An effective management structure is in place, and the PIU had demonstrated its capacity to 
deliver results efficiently. It has established a strong track record of performance, has familiarity with the 
World Bank’s fiduciary guidelines, as well as functional MIS and M&E systems. Lessons learned from the 
implementation arrangements for the predecessor SCORE and ICT Sector Support projects have been 
considered when designing implementation arrangements for this project.  
57. 
The PIU will coordinate activities across the FGS where necessary at the FMS level, making it 
unnecessary to establish subsidiary implementation arrangements with the FMS. The PIU will include 
focal persons from MDAs to coordinate and oversee the implementation of activities at sponsoring MDAs, 
with attention to sequencing and timing issues, as well as ensuring effective stakeholder consultations 
and engagements. As such, the project would enable delivery of support across the FMS depending on 
the readiness of the states. 
58. 
The duties and functions of the PIU will include (a) providing assistance to MDAs (including the 
FMS depending on the readiness of the states) and initial support to the MSME Financing Facility in 
preparing priority investment programs; (b) appointing consultants and stakeholders for specific 
assignments, including participation in the supervision of technical solutions requiring stakeholder 
participation; (c) monitoring quality and costs of executed assignments; (d) validating results on the 
ground through stakeholders and third parties, as needed; (e) establishing proactive communications and 
consultations with project stakeholders; (f) coordinating with MDAs, the MSME Financing Facility, and the 
private sector; and (g) revising and updating documents governing PIU staffing hiring. To facilitate early 
project readiness, the PIU will support the MSME Financing Facility in the initial setting-up period. As a 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 119 
 
condition of project effectiveness, the authorities will submit to IDA a satisfactory POM that the PIU would 
follow in helping MDAs and others to prepare and implement project activities. The POM would specify 
the managerial, financial, administrative, procurement, environmental, and social safeguard policies and 
procedures for the execution of the project as well as operating the GRM, and the eligibility criteria for 
the selection of PFIs and final beneficiaries of the MSME Financing Facility. Similarly, as a condition of 
disbursement under the MSME Financing Facility, the authorities will prepare and submit to IDA a 
satisfactory MSME Subproject Manual (forming an annex or schedule to the POM). 
59. 
The MoF will establish the MSME Financing Facility to provide funding and capacity building to 
PFIs. For the dedicated entity to have credibility in the market, the newly established institution must 
quickly demonstrate that it has the capacity to appraise projects on technical and financial merits, and 
that it will be allowed to operate as an independent institution with the mandate for appraisal of all PFIs 
requiring access to the MSME Financing Facility. It will take some time for the entity to develop full in-
house capacity to appraise projects. As such, there is a need for investment advisory support for the entity 
to demonstrate early on that its appraisal standards are not only sound, but that they will also stand the 
test of time and occasional pressure when the institution is forced to reject popular projects which are 
not financially or technically viable.  
60. 
The MSME Financing Facility will be managed by a board of directors and a competent 
management team. The independent board of directors (majority private sector) will be assigned 
oversight responsibility for the MSME Financing Facility and hiring of a professional management team 
which will include competency in environment and social safeguards assessment and other technical 
areas to support effective operations. The MSME Financing Facility setup will include an external advisory 
board to provide specialists’ advice on specific topics to the board of directors and management. 
61. 
Under the project, the selection of PFIs will be done by the MSME Financing Facility without 
undue outside interference. The participation of banks and nonbank financial institutions in the MSME 
Financing Facility will be based on criteria that will ensure their capacity to implement as well as embed 
World Bank Directive on Investment Policy Financing and draw on the IFC investment standards. The E&S 
management consultant will be involved in the identification exercises undertaken by this entity. The 
selection criteria related to the World Bank Directive focuses on adherence to prudential regulatory ratios, 
minimum capital and operational standards, appropriate governance, policies, and risk management 
functions. PFIs will be subjected to fit and proper tests, AML/CFT controls, and reporting obligations to 
the FRC and will fall under the supervision of the CBS, according to FATF standards and the Somali 
AML/CFT legal framework, based on their risk. Additional requirements may be set out in the MSME 
Subproject Manual. Segregation of duties and responsibilities will ensure that all MSME funding requests 
are assessed by PFIs and not the MSME Financing Facility. The MSME Financing Facility will assess PFIs’ 
eligibility to participate against well-established selection criteria set out in the MSME Subproject Manual 
to avoid possible undue political interference. The MSME Financing Facility will submit, once each quarter, 
‘MSME Financing Facility Quarterly Progress Reports (QPRs)’, no later than one month after the end of 
that quarter, to its board of directors and IDA for review and clearance. 
62. 
The QPRs are to be provided to the Board of Directors, World Bank Group, and other 
stakeholders. These reports will be reviewed by World Bank and commented upon, as neccessary. 
Biannual reviews based on quarterly reports prepared by the MSME Financing Facility will form the basis 
of at least two implementation support reviews per year. An independent monitoring agent hired under 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 119 
 
the project will provide an added layer of physically monitoring the flow and use of the MSME Financing 
Facility by PFIs and final beneficiary verifications and reporting cases of fraud and corruption complaints 
by submitting periodic inspection reports covering standard audits of PFIs and sample checks of 
compliance in line with the accountability framework set out in the MSME Subproject Manual. These 
reports will be submitted to the board of directors, the MoF, and other participating investors and the 
World Bank Group for review and clearance. The monitoring agent will complement the safeguards 
responsibility of the MSME Financing Facility and will also act as an ‘early warning’ whistleblower in case 
governance issues are detected. The QPRs and monitoring agent periodic inspection reports will inform, 
among other issues, (a) perfomance indicators, (b) compliance with remedial actions to be taken for E&S 
safeguards and GRM, (c) implementation progress of activities, and (d) status of funds. At the end of the 
second year, the FGS and World Bank will carry out a joint midterm review of progress made in carrying 
out the project. 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
63. 
Results M&E will involve both the PIU measuring and monitoring results and a World Bank 
review. The PIU will be responsible for monitoring and reporting results. The newly established M&E Unit 
in the PIU will systematically gather and enter data from different sources into an MIS, thereby constantly 
keeping it updated. The M&E function is expected to develop an M&E plan and socialize with the PIU and 
other stakeholders highlighting the theory of change, data collection methodology with time line and 
definitions of indicators. For specific monitoring activities on the MSME Financing Facility and digital ID 
services, the FGS will establish autonomous management bodies that will be assigned oversight and M&E 
responsibilties. The MSME Financing Facility may procure a technology-based solution that will allow PFIs 
to report efficiently. An external M&E specialist may also be hired to conduct MSME beneficiary surveys 
to measure satisfaction with quality of on-lending processes and services provided by PFIs. As part of the 
ID services subcomponent, the autonomous entity will be responsible for measuring key enrollment 
statistics, as well as conducting surveys of registrants and spot checks to measure service delivery and 
satisfaction of the planning and enrollment process of the digital ID system. All other PDO and 
intermediate-level monitoring activities will be monitored and reported on by the M&E Unit in the PIU. 
Strategic alliances will be established with communities, final beneficiaries, and PFIs to support M&E 
efforts. The PIU will ensure that the M&E specialist is equipped with the tools and capacity to undertake 
their duties effectively and will capacitate the rest of the PIU to understand their role in contributing to 
project results in addition to implementing project activities. 
C. Sustainability 
64. 
Somalia is fiscally constrained, meaning that the adoption of new budgetary units under the 
project will be treated with caution and managed carefully in coordination with the MoF to ensure fiscal 
sustainability. The selection of solutions will be based on confirmation of adequate sources of funds 
needed to meet operations and maintenance costs of completed service facilities, including confirmation 
of stakeholder contributions in cash or kind which contributes to fiscal sustainability. In this regard, fiscal 
sustainability of service delivery from project interventions will be ensured by (a) requiring full stakeholder 
involvement in solution selection; (b) requiring the subsidy component, if any, in pricing by the MSME 
Financing Facility to be explicit and transparent and gradually phased out as a commercial market segment 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
(P168115) 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 119 
 
is established for lending to MSMEs in underserved key sectors such as energy and livestock24; and (c) 
reviewing responsibility for operations and maintenance costs as an explicit feature of project 
validation/confirmation at the time of design of specific solutions and rejecting solutions with inadequate 
or no provisions for sustainability. For digital Government services, the responsibility for sustainability of 
completed service delivery facilities resides with the MDAs in consultations with the MoF to ring-fence 
annual operation and maintenance budgets. The project-supported 