 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD3421  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT 
ON A 
PROPOSED PRE-ARREARS CLEARANCE GRANT  
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 46.8 MILLION 
(US$65 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
TO THE 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA  
FOR THE 
SHOCK RESPONSIVE SAFETY NET FOR HUMAN CAPITAL PROJECT 
 
July 26, 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social Protection and Jobs Global Practice 
Africa Region 
 
   
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective June 30, 2019) 
 
Currency Unit =  Somali Shilling (SOS) 
SOS 578.50 = US$1 
US$1 = SDR 0.71931579 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1–December 31 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
BRA 
Banadir Regional Authorities 
CBT 
Cash-Based Targeting  
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework 
DFID 
U.K. Department for International Development  
DPFP 
Data Protection Focal Person  
DWG 
Donors Working Group 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
EU 
European Union 
FAO 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN 
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence  
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMFA 
Financial Management Framework Agreement 
FMS 
Federal Member States  
FRS 
Federal Republic of Somalia  
GBV 
Gender-Based Violence 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GRM 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
HIPC 
IDA 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries  
International Development Association 
IDP 
Internally Displaced Person 
IFMIS 
Integrated Financial Management Information System 
IFR 
Interim Financial Report 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
IPC 
Integrated Phase Classification 
MAM 
Moderate Acute Malnutrition 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MEB 
Minimum Expenditure Basket 
MIS 
Management Information System 
MoF 
Ministry of Finance 
 
 
 
MoLSA 
Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs  
MTR 
Midterm Review 
NDP 
National Development Plan 
NGO 
Nongovernmental Organization 
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
PFM 
Public Financial Management  
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PP 
Procurement Plan 
PPA 
Public Procurement, Concessions, and Disposal Act  
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development  
SAM 
Severe Acute Malnutrition 
SCALED-UP 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship through 
Digital Uplift Project 
SCD 
Systematic Country Diagnostics 
SEA 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
SEP 
Stakeholders Engagement Plan 
SMP 
Staff-Monitored Program 
SNHCP 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project 
SP 
Social Protection  
SSN 
Social Safety Net 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement  
TA 
Technical Assistance  
TAF 
Technical Assistance Facility  
TOR 
Terms of Reference 
TPM 
Third-Party Monitoring 
UCS 
Use of Country Systems 
UCT 
Unconditional Cash Transfers 
UN 
United Nations 
UNICEF 
United Nations Children’s Fund  
WFP 
World Food Programme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Hafez M. H. Ghanem 
Country Director: Carlos Felipe Jaramillo 
Senior Global Practice Director: Michal J. Rutkowski 
Practice Manager: Robert S. Chase 
Task Team Leader(s): Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
DATASHEET ................................................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 6 
A. Country Context................................................................................................................................ 6 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................. 10 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ............................................................................................. 13 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 14 
A. Project Development Objective ..................................................................................................... 14 
B. Project Components ....................................................................................................................... 15 
C. Project Beneficiaries ....................................................................................................................... 18 
D. Results Chain .................................................................................................................................. 19 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners ................................................................... 20 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design .................................................................... 21 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................ 22 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 22 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements......................................................................... 24 
C. Sustainability ................................................................................................................................... 24 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 25 
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis (if applicable) ............................................................ 25 
B. Fiduciary .......................................................................................................................................... 28 
C. Legal Operational Policies ............................................................................................................... 31 
D. Environmental and Social ............................................................................................................... 31 
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES ..................................................................................... 35 
VI. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 36 
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 40 
Annex 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan .................................................. 46 
Annex 2: Detailed Components Description ......................................................................... 52 
Annex 3: Detailed Targeting Methodology for Component 1 ................................................ 62 
Annex 4: Financial Management Arrangements ................................................................... 69 
Annex 5: Procurement Arrangements .................................................................................. 80 
Annex 6: Gender and Gender-based Violence Analysis ......................................................... 87 
ANNEX 7: MAP .................................................................................................................... 90 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
     
1 
 
     
DATASHEET 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 
 BASIC INFO TABLE 
Country(ies) 
Project Name 
Somalia 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental and Social Risk 
Classification 
Process 
P171346 
Investment Project 
Financing 
Substantial 
Urgent Need or 
Capacity Constraints 
(FCC) 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component  (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Disbursement-linked Indicators (DLIs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[  ] Conflict  
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[✓] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
08-Aug-2019 
31-Aug-2022 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
No 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The project development objective is to provide cash transfers to targeted poor and vulnerable households and 
establish the key building blocks of a national shock-responsive safety net system. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
2
 
 
 
Components 
 
Component Name  
Cost (US$, millions) 
 
Nutrition-linked Unconditional Cash Transfers  
  53.00 
 
Delivery Systems and Institutional Capacity Building  
   6.00 
 
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Management  
   6.00 
 
 
Organizations 
 
Borrower:  
 Federal Republic of Somalia  
Implementing Agency: 
 Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs  
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
Total Project Cost 
65.00 
Total Financing 
65.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
65.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILS-NewFinEnh1 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
65.00 
          IDA Grant 
65.00 
 
  
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Guarantee Amount 
Total Amount 
 National PBA 
   0.00 
  65.00 
   0.00 
  65.00 
Total 
   0.00 
  65.00 
   0.00 
  65.00 
 
 
 
Expected Disbursements (in US$, Millions) 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
3
 
 
WB Fiscal Year   
 
 
 
 
 
 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  40.00 
  15.00 
   9.50 
   0.50 
Cumulative 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  40.00 
  55.00 
  64.50 
  65.00 
  
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Social Protection & Jobs 
 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
Gender Tag 
Does the project plan to undertake any of the following? 
a. Analysis to identify Project-relevant gaps between males and females, especially in light of 
country gaps identified through SCD and CPF 
Yes 
b. Specific action(s) to address the gender gaps identified in (a) and/or to improve women or 
men's empowerment 
Yes 
c. Include Indicators in results framework to monitor outcomes from actions identified in (b) 
Yes 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
⚫ High 
2. Macroeconomic 
⚫ Moderate 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ Substantial 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ Substantial 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
⚫ Substantial 
6. Fiduciary 
⚫ High 
7. Environment and Social 
⚫ Substantial 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
4
 
 
8. Stakeholders 
⚫ Moderate 
9. Other 
 
10. Overall 
⚫ Substantial 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?  
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
  
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Not Currently Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Not Currently Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Not Currently Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
5
 
 
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
Legal Covenants 
  
 Sections and Description 
The Recipient shall not later than ninety (90) days after the Effective Date, establish and thereafter, maintain 
throughout the Project implementation the PIU within the Federal MoLSA with resources, terms of reference, 
staffing, and other resources, satisfactory to the Association. 
 
 
 
 
Conditions 
  
Type 
Description 
Disbursement 
Payments made prior to the Signature Date of the Financing Agreement, except that 
withdrawals up to an aggregate amount not to exceed SDR 1,440,000 may be made for 
payments made prior to this date but on or after June 1, 2019, for Eligible Expenditures 
under Categories (2) set forth in the table under Schedule 2 Section III.A.1 of the Financing 
Agreement; or 
 
Type 
Description 
Disbursement 
Payments for Cash Transfer under Category (1) set forth in the table under Schedule 2 
Section III.A.1 of the Financing Agreement, unless the Recipient has prepared, adopted and 
disclosed the following social risk management instruments: Social Management Plan 
(including, inter alia, a gender-based violence (GBV) Action Plan) and Labour Management 
Procedures, all in form and substance satisfactory to the Association; or 
 
Type 
Description 
Disbursement 
Payments under Categories (3) and (4) set forth in the table under Schedule 2 Section III.A.1 
of the Financing Agreement, unless the Recipient has prepared and adopted the Project 
Operations Manual, in form and substance satisfactory to the Association. 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
6
 
 
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
 
A. Country Context 
1. 
After more than two decades of conflict and insecurity, Somalia is gradually establishing the 
foundations for stability and a new political settlement. Since 1991, southern Somalia has experienced 
cycles of conflict that have fragmented the country, destroyed legitimate institutions, and created 
widespread vulnerabilities. The civil war resulted in the deaths of tens of thousands of Somalis and 
exacerbated the 1991 famine. Efforts during the 1990s and 2000s aimed at restoring peace were 
undermined by ongoing insecurity and the rise of a militia-based opposition, known today as Al-Shabaab. 
However, Somalia has entered a new phase of relative peace and stability since 2011, with the Agreement 
on the Provisional Constitution and the establishment of the Federal Republic of Somalia (FRS) bringing 
to power the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) in 2012 and ending a long period of revolving 
transitional governments. The federal system of governance, with its newly formed Federal Member 
States (FMS), opens a new chapter for Somalia’s development and offers hope for a stable future. 
However, the federation process is complex, representing both a significant development opportunity as 
well as uncertainties over representation and power and resource sharing. Meanwhile, the nature of 
Somaliland’s relationship with Somalia remains unresolved. Further, insecurity remains a concern, as 
demonstrated by recent attacks by Al-Shabaab in March and April 2019. Drought, competition for natural 
resources, and poor living conditions also fuel fighting in rural areas. As such, government control beyond 
urban areas and key towns and cities continues to be limited. 
2. 
Despite improvements in the macroeconomic outlook, economic challenges continue to be 
daunting, and growth remains insufficient to address widespread vulnerabilities. Between 2013 and 
2017, Somali real gross domestic product (GDP) was estimated to have grown at an average of 2.5 percent 
per year while population grew by 2.9 percent per year. This resulted in an annual contraction of per 
capita GDP of 0.3 percent a year.1 Growth is mainly consumption driven, enabled by large remittance and 
aid inflows, estimated at about US$1.4 billion a year, equivalent to about 23 percent of Somalia’s GDP 
(IMF 2017), while construction, telecommunications, and money transfer services have been the key 
growth sectors. Remittances sent by the diaspora contribute substantially to household income and 
consumption for the bottom 40 percent. Half of Somalia’s estimated 12 million people live in rural areas, 
pursuing pastoralist and agro-pastoralist livelihoods, which are increasingly exposed to climate change. 
Nevertheless, the agriculture sector remains the backbone of the economy and accounts for about 75 
percent of GDP, among the highest in the world.2 Spending by the FGS has expanded significantly over the 
past five years along with expanded revenue mobilization, reaching 5.4 percent of GDP in 2018. However, 
spending remains concentrated on security and public administration, reflecting the immediate priorities 
of peacekeeping and peace-building, and neither the FGS nor the FMS is able to allocate meaningful 
resources for human capital or infrastructure development.3  
3. 
Somalia is highly vulnerable to natural disasters, namely repeated cycles of droughts driven by 
climate change, resulting in protracted humanitarian crisis. Somalia has experienced 14 droughts since 
                                            
1 World Bank. 2018. Somalia Economic Update – Edition No 3. Washington, DC: World Bank.  
2 World Bank. 2018. Country Partnership Framework for the Federal Republic of Somalia. Washington, DC: World Bank.  
3 World Bank. 2019. Draft Somalia Economic Update. Rebuilding Human Capital to Return to Prosperity. Fourth Edition. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
7
 
 
1960, averaging one every four years. Recently, the 2011 East Africa Drought resulted in the deaths of a 
quarter million people, half of them children under the age of five years, as well as the displacement of 
nearly 1 million people.4 In 2016/17, the country experienced another large-scale drought, leaving an 
estimated 6.7 million people in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. While famine was averted due to 
concerted international support, nearly 400,000 children still suffered from acute malnutrition and an 
additional 1 million people were internally displaced. In 2018, Somalia also experienced major flooding, 
which further displaced over 230,000 people, worsening the impacts of the 2016/17 drought.5 
Consequently, more than 1.5 million people became internally displaced since November 2016 because 
of drought, conflict, and flooding. This was in addition to an existing estimated caseload at that time of 
1.1 million people in protracted displacement.6 As such, about 14 percent of the total population remains 
internally displaced. Another drought is now anticipated in mid-2019 due to failed or late rains, which is 
expected to further deteriorate food security and displacement.7 The Center for Global Development 
therefore ranks Somalia as the most vulnerable country to climate change among 167 countries, adjusted 
for coping capacity.8 
4. 
This year, chronic food insecurity and the resulting severe malnutrition among children under 
five years will yet again reach crisis levels. Currently, about 3.4 million people are estimated to be in the 
‘Stressed’ (IPC 2) 9 phase through June 2019, while an additional 1.5 million are estimated to be in the 
‘Crisis’ (IPC 4) and ‘Emergency’ (IPC 4) phases. The population facing crisis and emergency phases are 
supported by humanitarian assistance to prevent famine conditions. However, lack of a formal safety net 
delivery system that provides predictable, reliable, and scalable assistance to households facing chronic 
food insecurity under the ‘Stressed’ phase risks worsening their food security in the event of a shock or 
stress. Moreover, high levels of chronic malnutrition persist across Somalia due to food insecurity, high 
morbidity, low immunization, and vitamin A supplementation, and poor care practices. While data on 
stunting of children under five years is limited, estimates range widely from 12 percent to 38 percent.10 
Currently, urgent treatment and nutrition support is required for an estimated 900,000 children under 
the age of five years, with about 140,000 children likely to be severely malnourished. 
5. 
Development outcomes have been exacerbated by the economic challenges and ongoing 
humanitarian crisis. Nearly 80 percent of Somalis live below the international poverty line11 according to 
                                            
4 World Bank. 2018. Country Partnership Framework for the Federal Republic of Somalia. Washington, DC: World Bank 
5 World Bank. 2017. Somalia Emergency Drought Response and Recovery Project. Project Appraisal Document, Washington, DC: 
World Bank.  
6 See https://data2.unhcr.org/en/situations/cccm_somalia.  
7 Data obtained from the Somalia Food Security Cluster indicates that large-scale, emergency food assistance has continued 
across Somalia, reaching 1.8 million to 2 million people per month between August and December 2018. This has prevented 
worse food security outcomes in many areas. See Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit – Somalia and Famine Early Warning 
System Network. 2019. ‘Key Message Update.’ http://fews.net/east-africa/somalia/key-message-update/january-2019. 
8 The survey ranks countries across four dimensions of climate impact: extreme weather, sea-level rise, agricultural productivity 
loss, and overall. Rankings are based on a comprehensive dataset. See Wheeler, David. 2011. “Quantifying Vulnerability to Climate 
Change: Implications for Adaptation Assistance.” Center for Global Development, Washington, DC.  
9 IPC refers to the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification, which is a tool for improving food security analysis and decision 
making across a standardized five- phase scale with 1 being minimal and 5 being famine. It is intended to help governments and 
other humanitarian actors quickly understand a crisis (or potential crisis) and take action. For more details, see 
http://fews.net/sectores-t%C3%B3picos/abordagem/classifica%C3%A7%C3%A3o-integrada-de-fases.  
10 The Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit reports 12 percent post Deyr 2015/16, while the 2006 Multiple Indicator Cluster 
Survey reports 38 percent. 
11 Poverty is estimated using the international US$1.90 2011 purchasing power parity poverty line.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
8
 
 
the second wave of the Somalia High Frequency Survey undertaken in 2017/18. This makes Somalia the 
third poorest country in the region, after Burundi and South Sudan.12 National poverty rates vary 
significantly across regions, and range between 26 percent and 70 percent. Poverty is more acute among 
children and youth,13 as well as in rural areas and among settlements of internally displaced persons 
(IDPs), with 70 percent living below the poverty line. Further, only 55 percent of Somalis are literate, only 
16 percent have completed primary school, and only 7 percent have finished secondary school. Over two-
thirds of urban households have access to basic water services, compared to only 20 percent of rural 
households, and less than 10 percent have basic sanitation or hygiene.14 Moreover, only about one-fifth 
of the population has access to electricity. In addition, maternal mortality was estimated at 734 for every 
100,000 births, and the under-five mortality rate, which was at 133 per 1,000 births before the 2016/17 
drought,15 is expected to have worsened because of the impacts of drought. Lastly, three-quarters of the 
population are under the age of 30 years, which, coupled with high rates of unemployment, presents 
major social and economic challenges. 
6. 
Vulnerability in Somalia is multidimensional and poor households are more likely to be deprived 
beyond monetary poverty, including literacy and education attainment, labor force participation, access 
to quality housing and improved water and sanitation. This deprivation holds both within and across 
regions. For example, nearly half of the population does not reach average consumption of food items, 
confirming the dire living standards of most Somalis. While gender is not a predictor of monetary poverty 
in the Somali context, fewer women have access to education (55 percent of women have no education 
as compared to 40 percent of men) and social norms constrain their access to jobs and economic 
opportunities.16 Overall, nine in ten Somali households are lagging in at least one of these dimensions. 
Moreover, vulnerability is directly linked to poverty incidence; the population clustered above the poverty 
line is naturally vulnerable to falling into poverty in case of an unexpected decrease in consumption levels. 
Thus, in addition to seven in ten people being below the poverty line, a further one in ten people are 
vulnerable to falling below the poverty line during a shock. 
7. 
Somalis are vulnerable to various covariate (that is, natural disasters and epidemics) and 
idiosyncratic (that is, injury, death, or unemployment) shocks, which threaten their well-being. Almost 
two in three Somali households (66 percent) reported experiencing at least one type of shock in the past 
12 months.17 Due to the 2016/17 drought, most of the reported shocks were related to fluctuation in 
climate and its impact on livelihoods and the economy. Given the dominance of agro-pastoralism in the 
                                            
12 World Bank. 2018. Country Partnership Framework for the Federal Republic of Somalia. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
13 Fifty-six percent of children under five years and 59 percent youth between 5 and 15 years are poor. 
14 UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund) and World Health Organization. 2019. Joint Monitoring Program. See 
https://washdata.org/data#!/som.  
15 UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund) and World Health Organization. 2019. Joint Monitoring Program. See 
https://washdata.org/data#!/som 
16 Social norms constrain women participation: anecdotal evidence suggests that banks require the husband to act as a guarantor 
for a loan, even when the woman has collateral; and inheritance practices limit women’s inheritance rights and access to land. 
At the same time, women tend to have access to fewer channels through which opportunities are advertised, such as notice 
boards, websites, and print media. 
17 There were 18 categories of shock in the dataset which were collapsed into 8 categories presented in the graphs. Loss of crop 
and livestock refers to crop failure; crop disease or pest, and livestock death or disease. Reduction in income includes loss of 
remittances or other assistance, job loss or business failure, and loss of a household member or main earner due to illness or 
accident. Conflict covers both experiencing violence and land eviction whereas other natural shocks include floods or landslides 
and fire.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
9
 
 
economy, household welfare is closely linked with changes in rain patterns. Of those who experienced a 
shock, one in two households reported suffering from drought impacts, while one in four households 
reported loss of crops or livestock and shortage of water for farming or cattle. One in every five 
households experienced high food prices and two out of five Somali households experienced multiple 
types of shocks within a year. The negative impact of each shock is greater if a household experiences 
multiple types of shocks simultaneously, because it leads to accumulation of vulnerabilities. 
8. 
Women and girls face specific challenges to economic and decision-making access. Traditional 
and religious norms limit women’s roles outside the domestic sphere and limit their participation in 
political and public decision-making forums. Despite their increasing engagement in economic activities, 
women are thought to be far poorer than men, because wealth is unevenly distributed in the household 
and across the wider economy. Even among those engaged in income-generating activities, the majority 
are in the informal sector. Furthermore, women’s involvement in wage labor is low (33–40 percent) and 
predominantly concentrated in the agriculture sector.  
9. 
Gender-based violence (GBV) is a threat to women and girls throughout Somalia. A 2016 GBV 
survey commissioned by the World Bank and United Nations (UN) partners found that 17 percent of 
women have experienced some form of physical or sexual violence from a non-partner.18 Further, intimate 
partner violence is a common experience that has been found to be often linked to women’s engagement 
in income-generating activities, affecting 36 percent of women interviewed. Displaced women and girls 
are among the most affected due to extreme poverty, marginalization and conflict, and climate-related 
shocks, such as droughts. Data emerging from the GBV Information Management System reveals that over 
14,000 cases of GBV were reported from January 2015 through June 2016. Of the total number of cases, 
over 50 percent were cases of physical assault, while incidence of rape and sexual assault ranged from 30 
percent to 34 percent during this period. A significant share of these cases—roughly 20 percent—were 
perpetrated against girls under the age of 17 years.  
10. 
Given the low development indicators and widespread vulnerabilities, Somalia needs to 
reorient government spending toward public investment, particularly investment to boost human 
capital. Somalia’s growth and prosperity depend heavily on the quality of its human capital, which in turn 
depends on Somalia’s ability to educate its youth and children to become productive citizens. Social 
protection (SP) interventions can play a key role in supporting poor and vulnerable households to prevent 
and mitigate the negative and long-lasting impact that shocks have on human capital formation and 
individual well-being. Further, cash transfers can enable families to spend more on goods (food, clean 
water, and medicine) and services (health and education) that generate human capital accumulation. 
Regular and predictable cash also allows families to increase precautionary savings, improve access to 
credit through formal and informal sharing mechanisms, and improve livelihood strategies. SP delivery 
systems, particularly social registries, likewise are helpful more broadly, as they provide a ‘gateway’ for 
households to register and be considered for one or more social programs. Given the great potential for 
improving the human capital of its citizens, particularly among the youth, most of whom confront limited 
socioeconomic opportunities, Somalia needs to put investments in human capital at the center of its 
peace-building and development agenda for transition from humanitarian to development approaches. 
                                            
18 World Bank. 2018. Country Partnership Framework for the Federal Republic of Somalia. Washington, DC: World Bank.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
10
 
 
11. 
Furthermore, in the absence of trusted institutions and inclusive socioeconomic opportunities, 
Somalia faces a ‘dual development trap’19 that perpetuates instability and exclusion and exposes the 
country to the risk of backtracking. Breaking out of this trap requires strengthening of the citizens’ trust 
in institutions and creation of inclusive opportunities for the poorest and most vulnerable and 
marginalized groups in the country. This can only be achieved through significant investments in services, 
human development, and economic opportunities, while continuing to address structural drivers of 
fragility.   
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
12. 
In the absence of a formal national safety net system, Somalis currently rely on traditional and 
informal kinship-based systems in the face of increasingly frequent shocks. However, these come under 
particular strain in the face of covariate shocks. When in need, Somalis first rely on family, community, or 
religious leaders, in this order. Remittances represent an important component of income for the bottom 
40 percent of households, but they are concentrated within particular clans, lineages, and extended 
families. Moreover, urban households are more likely to receive remittances. As such, remittances often 
do not reach the neediest, who are most likely to fall through the cracks of informal safety nets. 
Marginalized and minority rural groups are also likely to be excluded from such benefits because they lack 
access to resources.20  
13. 
In this context, humanitarian and development agencies have stepped in to deliver 
humanitarian aid and short-term social and livelihood assistance. In 2017, official foreign development 
aid to Somalia totaled US$1.75 billion, of which US$1 billion was in the form of humanitarian aid. The 
humanitarian assistance in 2017 spiked due to the drought and increased by 66 percent from the average 
of the previous three years, which was US$608 million per year.21 Most of these programs were initiated 
as an emergency response to help the targeted communities and households absorb shocks and hence 
had a short-term focus. As such, they fail to provide predictable, reliable, and scalable safety nets, which 
protect poor and vulnerable populations, address their vulnerabilities, and strengthen their resilience to 
shocks and stresses for medium-term recovery and longer-term development. Furthermore, 
humanitarian programs do not support national government-led service delivery systems, which 
contribute to the enhanced legitimacy of, and trust in, institutions and the Government by its citizens. 
14. 
There are however a few programs that are shifting from emergency relief to greater resilience 
building, with focus at the household and community levels. Conditional and unconditional cash 
transfers continue to be the most common forms of safety net assistance, but there are also schemes 
related to public works, cash or food for work, skills training, food vouchers, and school feeding and child 
nutrition. However, most of these programs are of limited duration and coverage. The primary 
international agencies and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) implementing SP interventions include 
the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the World Food Programme (WFP), the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the UN (FAO), African Development Solutions, Building Resilient Communities in Somalia 
Consortium, and Save the Children Fund–United Kingdom, among others.  
                                            
19World Bank. 2018. Country Partnership Framework for the Federal Republic of Somalia. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
20 Rift Valley Institution. 2017. Remittances and Vulnerability in Somalia. Nairobi, Kenya.  
21 Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Development. 2018. “Aid Flows in Somalia: Analysis of Aid.” Federal Republic 
of Somalia, Mogadishu, Somalia.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
11
 
 
15. 
While these programs deliver critical benefits to the targeted households and communities, 
they are implemented outside the Government structure and lack a common strategic vision. Currently, 
there are wide variations in eligibility criteria, benefit amount, transfer mechanisms, and coverage period 
among SP programs. For example, some programs use mobile money network operations for money 
transfer, as Somalia is a global leader in cellphone coverage and mobile money transfers.22 However, 
significant gaps in the regulatory framework remain a major challenge due to the absence of a well-
functioning formal banking system. These variations raise concerns about effectiveness, sustainability, 
and equity. Due to the absence of a common targeting approach, an integrated management information 
system (MIS), or a social registry, it is difficult to draw conclusions on programs’ overlap, double counting, 
and inclusion and exclusion errors. WFP’s digital beneficiary database (SCOPE), which contains 
information on around 6 million people who have participated in WFP projects in Somalia, could provide 
an entry point toward developing a consolidated beneficiary database.23 However, moving from a 
program-specific beneficiary list to a national digitized social registry requires a functional ID system. The 
World Bank is leading the support to the FGS and the private sector on this front through its Somalia 
Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP, 
P168115).  
16. 
There is now a growing consensus among partners to adopt a longer-term development 
approach that builds the Government’s capacity to gradually take the lead in policy formulation and 
delivery of SP interventions. The United Kingdom Department for International Development (DFID) and 
the European Union (EU) in particular, are playing a fundamental role in paving the way to transition from 
a humanitarian to a development approach. DFID funds multiple cash transfer projects and has set up a 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) cell in Nairobi known as MESH that conducts phone-based interviews 
with the beneficiaries of these programs. This data provides a wealth of information particularly on 
benefit delivery and use that can help inform the way forward. The EU has also supported the initiation 
of a Donors Working Group (DWG) and the setup of a Technical Assistance Facility (TAF) on safety nets. 
The primary role of the DWG is to promote donor harmonization and alignment toward a common vision 
and funding strategy. The TAF is intended to promote pooled financing of technical experts to support the 
DWG in achieving a collective approach to technical assistance (TA). In addition, there is a Cash Working 
Group that brings together all actors that are using cash-based interventions to coordinate their activities. 
It also has a work stream on mobile money that tries to facilitate the use of mobile phones for delivering 
cash and often invites private sector actors to its meetings. The role of the Government in these initiatives 
is being further identified and supported.  
17. 
Since 2018, a Shock Responsive Safety Net Project has been piloted by WFP (funded by the EU) 
in the Banadir region of Somalia. The objective of this project is to shift support to vulnerable families 
from humanitarian assistance to a longer-term, predictable intervention that helps people withstand 
shocks and reduce their vulnerability. The project targets 125,000 urban poor people (about 20,000 
households) through predictable cash transfers. Beneficiaries are chronic poor, most of whom are 
protracted IDPs with little to no livelihood opportunities, as well as the disabled and families with 
                                            
22 Eighty-eight percent of Somalis above the age of 16 years own at least one SIM card and 83 percent of SIM card owners use 
mobile money. See World Bank. 2018. Stocktaking of Evidence for a Social Protection Policy Framework. Washington, DC: World 
Bank.  
23 WFP has recently undertaken a stocktaking exercise of existing beneficiary databases and is looking at the interoperability of 
the system. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
12
 
 
malnourished children. The project is designed to enable scaling up of the safety net cash transfer amount 
in times of shock. Furthermore, the participation and ownership of the Banadir Regional Authorities (BRA) 
has been embedded in the project design, in terms of beneficiary selection, verification, and outreach. 
From 2019, a portion of the transfers will also be delivered by BRA directly, with technical and financial 
support from WFP. Regular monitoring has shown that the use of severe coping mechanisms, with 
households spending less money on food, has decreased over time. During qualitative interviews, 
beneficiaries also indicated that they were now able to send children to school, thereby improving 
education outcomes.  
18. 
In recent years, the FGS, represented by the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MoLSA), 
initiated a policy dialogue to explore options for shifting from humanitarian to a Government-led SP 
agenda. Currently, MoLSA is leading a ‘Food Security, Nutrition and Social Protection’ sub-working group 
at the federal level under the Government-led ‘Resilience Pillar Working Group’ of the National 
Development Plan (NDP). Several ministries24 are represented in this sub-working group. In addition, 
MoLSA has drafted a National Social Protection Policy, which has been approved by the Steering 
Committee for the Social Protection Joint Program,25 and is nearing approval by the subcommittee of the 
Social Sector Cabinet. MoLSA has also been developing a five-year Social Protection Implementation 
Framework, with TA from UNICEF and WFP. Further, MoLSA has created a Technical Working Group on 
Social Protection comprising focal points from the Offices of the President and the Prime Minister and 
relevant ministries, including the Ministry of Finance (MoF), as well as focal points from all the FMS. 
Nonetheless, the development of a formal SP system is still at a nascent stage, particularly in terms of 
institutional and governance arrangements at the federal and state levels. The capacity of MoLSA requires 
further strengthening to effectively take over the delivery of safety net interventions. Therefore, 
substantial institutional capacity building and policy dialogue will be required between federal and state 
levels, engaging partners, NGOs, civil society, and the private sector. 
19. 
There now exists an opportunity to support efforts toward establishing a Government-led SP 
system, as the FGS is on track to achieve debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) 
Initiative. The most recent third Staff-Monitored Program (SMP) by the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) assessed that implementation of necessary macroeconomic and fiscal reforms by the FGS is 
continuing satisfactorily, leading to positive outlooks for increased domestic revenues resulting from a 
strengthened tax base and administration. Intergovernmental transfers have increased, and financial 
sector reforms are providing the private sector confidence to increase deposits and banks to increase 
lending. At the same time, Somalia has an opportunity to leapfrog a traditional banking sector, which 
currently has only 15.5 percent penetration, and move toward a mobile money-based system, which has 
a penetration of 73 percent, with about US$400 million ‘saved’ in the system.26 Although the financial 
sector legal and regulatory framework is making real progress, gaps remain and the system is vulnerable 
to insecurity and weaknesses in the broader rule of law system. Nonetheless, an opportunity exists today 
to use the pre-arrears clearance grant facility within IDA to support efforts in strengthening SP systems in 
the country. 
                                            
24 These include Agriculture, Planning, Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management, and Office of the Prime Minister. 
25 The Social Protection Joint Program is chaired by MoLSA, and members include the ministries of Planning, Humanitarian Affairs 
and Disaster Management, WFP, UNICEF, and the Italian cooperation, who has also funded the program. 
26 World Bank. 2019. “Presentation – Somalia: Achieving Debt Relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative.” 
World Bank, Washington, DC.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
13
 
 
20. 
In this context, the proposed Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (SNHCP) 
builds a bridge beyond the humanitarian approach, addressing Somalia’s immediate food security and 
nutrition issues, while also laying the foundations for human capital investment over the longer-term. 
The SNHCP will provide poor and vulnerable households nutrition-linked cash transfers to meet their 
immediate consumption gaps and protect against food insecurity and malnutrition risks expected as a 
result of the developing drought in 2019. With a view toward longer-term development, it would also 
support efforts by the FGS to strengthen institutional resilience and establish the basic delivery 
mechanisms of a national social safety net (SSN) system. Further, the project would build on the 
experiences and lessons learned to date of partners in Somalia providing humanitarian assistance and 
safety net support, considering the findings and recommendations of the numerous research works 
conducted in the country to ensure a flexible and ‘learning-by-doing’ approach. As such, it would gradually 
scale up what is already working, adjusting the design during implementation, as needed.  
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
21. 
SP is an important part of the FGS strategy to fight poverty and promote resilience. This is 
enshrined in the Provisional Constitution of Somalia (2011), which provides for the rights of all persons to 
access economic and social rights, including SP and the protection of particular vulnerable groups. Further, 
it is articulated in the NDP of 2016 whose overall vision is to “Enhance peace and stability, economic 
prosperity and national cohesions” such that “...the most marginalized can become productive members 
of society and the economy and the most vulnerable can live with dignity and safety.” The NDP therefore 
represents a guiding framework for articulating SP as a platform that can be leveraged to unlock human 
capital outcomes by creating access to services and opportunities for the poor and most vulnerable. Lastly, 
a draft of the Somalia Social Protection Policy (2019) is now being finalized, where the FGS prioritizes SP 
“to address predictable needs through the life cycle in order to protect all groups, and particularly the 
poor and vulnerable, against shocks, help them to manage risks, and provide them with opportunities to 
overcome poverty, vulnerability, and exclusion.” 
22. 
The SNHCP is well aligned with the World Bank’s Systematic Country Diagnostics (SCD) 
undertaken in 2018 and Country Partnership Framework (CPF) discussed by the Board on September 
25, 2018. The SCD notes that “a well targeted and effective social protection program adaptable to local 
contexts is an overarching objective to avoid famines and open a path to sustainable poverty reduction 
and shared prosperity. It would also help build trust in state-run programs, and ultimately in state 
authority.” The CPF also highlights a scalable and reliable safety net system as a key contributor to one of 
its two objectives, that is, to improve delivery systems for inclusive social services. As such, it notes the 
need for the “Bank team [to] start work, together with international donor and humanitarian partners, to 
build the systems of government necessary to leverage existing cash-transfers towards a more sustainable 
social safety net system able to respond to shocks.” 
23. 
The project is also well aligned with the World Bank’s Africa Regional Strategy (2019) and draft 
Strategy for Countries affected by Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV) 2019. Both emphasize that 
addressing fragility effectively requires a fundamentally different development approach based on 
innovative solutions and an adapted toolkit. As such, the strategies encourage leveraging partnerships 
with the UN in fragile situations. Further, it emphasizes that strengthening the humanitarian-development 
nexus is key to effectively addressing fragility and entails, among others, (a) fighting against exclusion and 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
14
 
 
addressing grievances, (b) building capacities to achieve results, and (c) reinforcing accountability of and 
building citizens’ confidence in institutions. 
24. 
The proposed SNHCP aims to strengthen the humanitarian-development nexus. In the short 
term, the project would meet immediate consumption gaps arising from the impending 2019 drought by 
providing cash transfers to the poorest and most vulnerable households in communities underserved by 
humanitarian interventions. Through these efforts, it is expected that the SNHCP would enhance the 
resilience of targeted households by helping them avoid negative coping mechanisms and mitigate the 
impact of recurrent droughts, while also easing the financial burden on humanitarian assistance. In the 
medium term, it would establish key building blocks of a national SSN system that can deliver a reliable, 
predictable, and scalable safety net for medium-term recovery and longer-term development outcomes. 
It would also work to strengthen the capacities and institutional resilience of key institutions within the 
FGS and FMS to ensure that the Government is empowered to adopt a greater role in delivering support 
to its people in the future for sustainability of efforts. This is also expected to contribute to a strengthened 
social contract between the Government and its citizens.  
 
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 
A. Project Development Objective 
PDO Statement 
25. 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to provide cash transfers to targeted poor and 
vulnerable households and establish the key building blocks of a national shock-responsive safety net 
system. 
26. 
Shock responsiveness is defined and measured by the establishment of a social registry, which 
will support the scale-up of future safety net programs during shocks.  
PDO Level Indicators 
27. 
The project is expected to measure achievement of the PDOs with the following outcome 
indicators:  
(a) Nutrition-linked Unconditional Cash Transfers  
a) 
Beneficiaries of social safety net programs, of which female (core indicator)  
(b) Delivery Systems and Institutional Capacity Building 
a) 
National cash transfer program targeting methodology developed and endorsed by 
FGS 
b) 
Operational manual of the national social registry developed and endorsed by the 
FGS 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
15
 
 
B. Project Components 
28. 
The SNHCP has a total of US$65 million financed from the IDA’s pre-arrears clearance grant 
facility and would support three components, to be implemented over a three-year period. The 
components are (a) Nutrition-linked Unconditional Cash Transfers; (b) Delivery Systems and Institutional 
Capacity Building; and (c) Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Management.  
29. 
The project would be guided by principles of government ownership and capacity 
strengthening, collaboration with partners, complementarity with humanitarian assistance, and 
enhanced resilience. While implementation of the project would initially be supported by development 
partners, namely WFP and UNICEF, to implement significant activities, the FGS would be the direct 
recipient of the IDA grant and be responsible for all aspects of project design and implementation. From 
the onset, focus would be on strengthening government capacities in terms of systems, procedures, and 
institutional development. However, the path to government ownership and expanded capacity lies 
through partnerships with development partners that have developed capacity and know-how of 
delivering safety net style assistance on a large scale. The SNHCP would therefore actively collaborate and 
coordinate with partners to ensure that the experiences and lessons learned to date are included in the 
design and implementation of the project.  
Component 1: Nutrition-linked Unconditional Cash Transfers (SDR38.16 million, US$53.0 million 
equivalent) 
30. 
This component would provide unconditional cash transfers to households that are chronically 
poor and vulnerable to drought and malnutrition and link them to complementary nutritional support 
programs. The objectives of the component are to (a) support households to strengthen their resilience 
and avoid negative coping mechanisms (for example, selling off existing household assets) to meet 
escalating needs because of the drought in the short term and (b) promote human capital investment in 
the medium to long term by linking beneficiary households to complementary nutrition services (where 
they exist)27 and continuing to smooth consumption gaps through predictable and reliable provision of 
cash transfer, even after drought risks are no longer present. Around 200,000 beneficiary households 
(approximately 1.2 million individuals)28 with children under five years will receive a monthly payment of 
US$20 delivered quarterly, initially for one year.  The FGS is seeking support from development partners, 
including IDA, for sustaining the delivery of the cash transfers beyond the first year.  Successful 
implementation and delivering results on the ground, are expected to promote the program and mobilize 
additional funding, including the potential of a gradual shift from humanitarian funding to funding a 
national shock-responsive safety net program supported by this Project.  The benefit size has been based 
on estimates and initial data on prices of the minimum expenditure basket (MEB) for food.29 While food 
prices vary significantly by region and season, rough estimates indicate that a US$20 benefit would cover, 
on average, about 50–70 percent of the MEB, based on the December 2018 price data. Mothers or female 
caregivers of children would be the direct recipients of the transfer. 
                                            
27 It would also be expected that this could lead to an increased demand by households for nutrition services, thereby compelling 
service providers to expand coverage in rural areas.  
28 This assumes an average household size of six members. 
29 The MEB for food includes a household of six members with caloric needs for cereal, cowpeas, oil, and sugar.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
16
 
 
31. 
This component would complement humanitarian assistance as a means of responding to the 
impending 2019 drought. Humanitarian agencies generally focus on areas experiencing emergency and 
crisis levels of food insecurity to prevent famine. At the same time, areas classified as ‘Stressed’ which 
cannot fully meet food consumption needs, are excluded from humanitarian assistance, and therefore, 
are at risk of worsening food conditions, if not protected. By contrast, this component would allow for 
targeting of poor and vulnerable households, thus providing them with cash transfers to mitigate the 
likelihood that they would be pushed into higher categories by the impending drought. Further, by 
extending protection to the ‘Stressed’ populations, Component 1 would lessen the burden on the 
humanitarian assistance programs by preventing beneficiary households from reaching emergency and 
crisis levels of food insecurity. 
32. 
The cash transfers would be available across Somalia’s FMS30 and would focus primarily on rural 
areas,31 which are often in the ‘Stressed’ category and are underserved by humanitarian assistance 
programs. Most humanitarian assistance focusses on urban areas and IDPs. Although present, 
humanitarian agencies focus less on rural areas despite the fact that around 50 percent of the population 
reside there. This is because rural areas experience more chronic levels of food insecurity, rather than 
acute humanitarian needs. Cash transfers under Component 1 would therefore prioritize rural areas, 
including in Somaliland, to ensure that benefits are provided to the underserved or unserved. Districts 
selection will be based on a distress index as described in the targeting methodology in Annex 3.  
33. 
Implementation of Component 1 will be supported by WFP that will be contracted by MoLSA 
under a service contract arrangement to deliver nutrition-linked cash transfers. To enhance the visibility 
of the role of the FGS in delivering assistance to its people, WFP will make clear that this is a Government 
project through its sensitization and communication to communities and the general public. The 
operational cycles for the cash transfer would include communication, registration of potential 
beneficiaries, enrolment for and issuance of a program card, payment delivery, and grievance redress and 
monitoring. Implementation experiences of the cash transfer would also feed into documenting the 
lessons learned. These delivery processes will benefit from WFP’s experience in Somalia and their well-
developed SCOPE beneficiary management platform. WFP will maintain the database of the project 
beneficiaries, which will be migrated to MoLSA once the Government’s capacity to manage the database 
is in place. While maintaining the database on behalf of the FGS, WFP will apply its established personal 
data protection and privacy processes, aligned with the 2017 WFP corporate guideline and further 
detailed in annex 2.  
Component 2: Delivery Systems and Institutional Capacity Building (SDR4.32 million, US$6.0 million 
equivalent) 
34. 
Component 2 would establish the key building blocks of a SP delivery system, advance policy 
development, and strengthen institutional capacity of relevant government ministries to manage and 
implement it. The objective of the component is to build capacity of the FGS/MoLSA to gradually take 
over full management and implementation of a safety net program and lay the foundation for a more 
comprehensive SP system in Somalia. The component will provide policy support; TA for the development 
                                            
30 Official FMS include (in alphabetical order): Hirshebelle, Galmudug, Jubbaland, Puntland, and South West. Somaliland is also 
included in Component 1 of the SNHCP to ensure a fair distribution of resources.  
31 For example, Banadir will not be covered under Component 1 because it is an urban municipality with strong presence of 
humanitarian agencies. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
17
 
 
of safety net delivery systems, which include a social registry, MIS, operational procedures for registration, 
enrolment, targeting, grievance redress, payment delivery, monitoring, community outreach and 
information campaigns; and capacity-building activities.  
35. 
The component will be implemented with TA and implementation support by UNICEF. UNICEF 
will be contracted by MoLSA under a service contract arrangement to provide TA for the establishment of 
the key building blocks of a national SP system and institutional capacity building through training and 
other related services. Detailed descriptions of the specific activities are provided in Annex 3.  
36. 
The backbone of an effective and scalable SP system is a social registry. Several humanitarian 
and development agencies maintain separate lists of beneficiaries, but these are not linked, raising 
concerns of effectiveness and targeting. This component would support the development of a 
consolidated beneficiary lists across programs, enhancing coordination and collaboration and improving 
efficiencies. This would also serve as a first step toward a national social registry that in the future can 
also be used for coordinated service delivery to the poor and vulnerable and emergency assistance, 
thereby bridging existing humanitarian and development efforts.  
37. 
Activities under this component will be closely coordinated with the Somalia Cash Working 
Group and the TAF to enhance alignment and coordination of cash transfer programs. They will also 
benefit from several World Bank-supported interventions such as the foundational ID initiative and the 
regulatory framework of the information and communication technology sector, under the SCALED-UP 
Project, and would draw on the technical expertise of government experts, mobile network operators, 
financial service providers, technology service providers, and so on. 
38. 
Support to the above activities would be led by the FGS and would seek to reach an 
arrangement to define the role and working relationship between the FGS and its member states in 
delivering safety net programs. These would be undertaken through an inclusive dialogue to define the 
governance structure and roles between the federal and regional/state levels. The component will also 
support consultation with the private sector, humanitarian and development partners, NGOs, and civil 
society organizations. These would be supported through extensive consultations, workshops, and round 
table discussions. The purpose would be to ensure sustained commitment from all stakeholders to the 
common vision of supporting Somalia to establish a sustainable SP system.  
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Management 
(SDR4.32 million, US$6.0 million equivalent) 
39. 
Component 3 would establish a Project Implementation Unit (PIU), strengthen MoLSA’s 
coordination arrangements, promote learning and knowledge management through robust M&E, and 
support the design of a pilot productive safety net activity targeted at youth. Specifically, the PIU would 
be established at the federal level at MoLSA during the first year. Subsequently, separate antenna PIUs or 
focal points would be created in each of the member states. Focus would also be given to strengthening 
MoLSA’s coordination arrangements within other ministries and stakeholders at the federal level, and 
between the federal level and the member states at the local level.  
40. 
The federal PIU structure will be as follows. It will be headed by a project manager/coordinator 
and will include an operations officer, communications officer, MIS officer, grievance redress mechanism 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
18
 
 
(GRM) and social risk management officer, M&E officer, financial management (FM) officer, and 
procurement officer. The composition of the focal points at the member state level will be formed after 
consultation with state governments and will be informed by the agreed implementation and governance 
structure of the national safety net program. 
41. 
The PIU will support MoLSA on the day-to-day management of the project, coordination with 
other stakeholders, and for the project M&E. The component will finance the establishment of the PIUs, 
training of government officials and PIU staff, purchase of IT, goods, and office equipment and operating 
cost, as relevant. Additionally, the component will finance the contract of the third-party monitoring 
(TPM) firm and financial audits. 
42. 
Knowledge management and learning activities would also be supported by Component 3. This 
would include documenting the lessons and experiences of implementation of the project, which is 
expected to promote ‘learning by doing’ and adjustments to project design, as well as knowledge 
dissemination. The activities carried out under this component will contribute to the global knowledge on 
designing and implementing SP interventions in FCV contexts.  
43. 
The component will also support the design and preparation of a pilot productive safety net 
activity targeting youth. It is expected that, if successful, this will be rolled out using additional financing, 
and/or external financing by development partners. This will support government capacity to test other 
forms of productive safety net interventions to address multiple vulnerabilities.  
 C. Project Beneficiaries 
44. 
The SNHCP is expected to target 200,000 poor and vulnerable households (approximately 1.2 
million individuals) across the FMS with nutrition-linked cash transfers. Targeting of beneficiaries will be 
conducted in three stages: (a) selection of districts, (b) selection of communities in the targeted districts, 
and (c) selection of households in the identified communities based on the household eligibility criteria 
through a community-based targeting (CBT) approach. The targeting methodology for Component 1 is 
detailed below and elaborated further in Annex 3.  
45. 
Selection of districts. Districts that meet the following selection criteria would be selected from 
each of the FMS: predominantly rural districts with high distress rating, which will consider vulnerability 
in terms of malnutrition, and past impact and/or risk of drought. Poverty rates will not be considered in 
the distress rating given that the number of poor people per district seems to be heavily contested. Several 
other considerations will affect the final choice of districts, including security and local capacity constraints 
such as the presence of implementing partners, and the ability of the payment agencies to disburse 
payments in those districts.  
46. 
Selection of communities. Even with a limited set of districts, not all communities may be covered 
due to the limited budget. The final list of communities will be based on the rates and caseload of severe 
acute malnutrition (SAM) and moderate acute malnutrition (MAM). These malnutrition data are available 
with WFP and UNICEF. The lowest level of disaggregation for these data are treatment facilities for 
SAM/MAM and the corresponding ‘catchment areas’ with multiple catchment areas per district. 
Catchment areas with highest rates and caseloads will be chosen up to the point allowed by the budget 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
19
 
 
allocated to the state and with consideration of the local socioeconomic dynamics. The list of communities 
corresponding to these areas will be compiled by UNICEF and passed on to WFP. 
47. 
Selection of beneficiary households. Using the existing SCOPE database, WFP will produce lists 
of households with women and children under five years corresponding to the selected communities. The 
list of households in each community has already been derived from CBT exercises conducted by WFP. All 
the households in the SCOPE database who meet the project eligibility criteria will be eligible for nutrition-
linked cash transfers under Component 1. The beneficiaries will be able to update their data (for example, 
changes in household composition) using the standard case management and grievance procedures under 
SCOPE, if necessary. Households that meet the eligibility criteria (poor and vulnerable households with 
children under the age of five) in the targeted communities, but may not be in the SCOPE registry, will 
also be able to register.  
D. Results Chain 
48. 
The SNHCP would provide reliable cash transfers to poor and vulnerable households to enhance 
their purchasing power and build resilience, while strengthening government capacity to design and 
implement a shock responsive safety net program for longer-term human capital growth. This is 
expected to meet urgent needs and mitigate impending drought risks in the short term. In the medium to 
longer term, a reliable and scalable safety net system would help households to smooth consumption 
gaps, secure basic needs, diversify livelihoods, and invest in human capital and economic participation. 
Through building resilience of beneficiary households, the project would support them to avoid negative 
coping mechanisms that may have irreversible adverse impacts on human capital, that is, eating less 
and/or poor quality and taking children out of school. The project is also expected to lay the foundations 
for a national safety net delivery system in Somalia that is owned, designed, and implemented by the 
Government. The project would thus aim at a gradual handover of the direct delivery of cash transfers to 
MoLSA, once it has sufficient capacity in place. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
20
 
 
Figure 1. Theory of Change for the SNHCP 
Note: CT = Cash Transfer;  
 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
49. 
The World Bank is well placed to support the SP sector in Somalia given its global, regional, and 
FCV country-specific technical expertise with cash transfers and scalable safety net systems that protect 
the poor and vulnerable from shocks, while promoting resilience. In particular, the World Bank brings 
expertise in developing SP delivery systems. This includes experience in the design of social registries for 
objective and transparent targeting of the poor and vulnerable, particularly in times of shock, that is, 
drought or flood, requiring scale-up of assistance. Further, it brings expertise in supporting governments 
to develop neutral and accountable targeting mechanisms, strong citizen-based socially accountable 
GRMs, and technology-based payment transfer systems, among others. Specifically, it has long-standing 
experience in working closely with governments and partners in capacity-constrained fragile contexts 
such as Afghanistan, Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of Congo, South Sudan, the Republic 
of Yemen, and others to support efforts aimed at strengthening humanitarian-development links and 
building resilience of households and communities for medium-term recovery and longer-term 
development outcomes.  
50. 
The proposed SNHCP would add value conceptually, institutionally, and operationally. 
Conceptually, it would result in the World Bank providing investments in a highly challenging situation to 
support critical safety net assistance with greater geographic spread in rural areas that have been 
heretofore underserved. It would also strengthen the humanitarian-development nexus for crisis 
response in the short and medium terms by providing cash transfers to mitigate impending drought risks. 
Institutionally, the SNHCP would establish the necessary foundations for longer-term development 
outcomes, developing the building blocks of an effective Government-led SP delivery system, and 
strengthening the capacity of relevant institutions to manage and implement it, thereby contributing to 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
21
 
 
the enhanced legitimacy of, and trust in, institutions and the Government by its citizens. Operationally, 
the project would engage in strategic partnerships with the UN to leverage their expertise and 
comparative advantage in supporting the delivery of safety net assistance and establishing safety net 
systems, while retaining flexibility and adopting a ‘learning-by-doing’ approach. 
51. 
The project has been designed in close consultation and with inputs from development partners 
and UN agencies. This collaboration will continue and expand during the implementation, supervision, 
and M&E of the project, particularly through the various working groups and platforms established to 
coordinate efforts across relevant complementary development activities. These include the MoLSA-led 
‘Food Security, Nutrition and Social Protection’ sub-working group and the Technical Working Group on 
Social Protection, as well as the partners-led DWG and the Cash Working Group, among others.  
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
52. 
International experience working on crisis response, including climate-related, protracted 
conflict and/or fragility, indicates the need to bridge the humanitarian-development divide. This is 
further reinforced by the draft FCV strategy (2019). The SNHCP design attempts to achieve this by 
delivering rapid safety net assistance (that is, cash transfers) to poor and vulnerable households affected 
by the current drought, while supporting efforts toward human capital accumulation (starting with access 
to nutrition services). With a view toward longer-term development, it also aims to establish a 
Government-led SP system and strengthen national institutional resilience for a gradual and sustainable 
approach to reducing extreme poverty and investing in human capital. Moreover, the project advances 
SP policy dialogue and governance arrangements to support joint efforts by humanitarian and 
development partners to gradually move from a pure humanitarian approach (that is, lifesaving 
interventions) to a more development-based approach that focuses on the accumulation of human 
capital, institutional and household resilience, and joint programming aligned with national strategies to 
maximize impact on poverty and vulnerabilities.  
53. 
Global and regional experiences of safety net implementation demonstrate that cash transfers 
can reduce poverty and food insecurity in Africa and other developing countries. Cash transfers that 
serve as a predictable and regular source of income to poor and vulnerable households have been found 
to reduce poverty gaps, increase food consumption, and alleviate reported hunger in countries such as 
Mexico, Brazil, Lesotho, and Zambia. Improved consumption has been shown to increase nutritional 
intake for children, a prerequisite for developing their future prospects. Moreover, cash transfers have 
been found to be effective in protecting households from shocks, preventing them from sliding into 
poverty, and helping them to avoid negative coping mechanisms. Furthermore, it supports households 
with access to resources to engage in entrepreneurial activities. In Kenya and Ethiopia, for example, cash 
transfers have been found to improve welfare through strengthened food security, enhance human 
capital through continued investment in health and education outcomes, and increase engagement in 
financially productive activities leading to greater savings and access to credit.  
54. 
Lessons from World Bank operations in FCV countries, that is, South Sudan, Republic of Yemen, 
and others, as well as ongoing projects in Somalia, emphasize the importance of ‘doing no harm’ and 
promoting social cohesion. The SNHCP design integrates measures not only to avoid aggravating conflict 
because of the project interventions, but to emphasize addressing the drivers of conflict. For example, the 
targeting approach ensures clear and objective criteria reduce exclusion and considers political economy 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
22
 
 
and fair and equitable access to participation. Community consultations are embedded in implementation 
processes, and a functional GRM is a prerequisite for project launch. These are achieved through engaging 
NGOs that are familiar with local contexts and challenges. Special attention is also given to the inclusion 
of minority and marginalized groups. In other FCV countries, effective community engagement and 
participation and rigorous monitoring have proven to help support social cohesion and foster inclusion of 
marginalized groups, including women, displaced populations, and other minorities.  
55. 
A World Bank review of global trends and challenges of SP programs in FCV countries indicates 
that in fragile settings, SP policies and programs can play a dual role in reducing exclusion and 
promoting cohesion. Specifically, SP policies and programs can contribute to (a) reducing social 
inequalities and exclusion through provision of income support/security, and access to employment 
opportunities and basic services, especially to historically excluded groups or populations in lagging 
regions and (b) enhancing social cohesion and social capital and thereby, reducing the probability of social 
tension, conflict, and violence, as well as building trust in state institutions, thereby supporting the state-
building agenda. 
56. 
The 2011 World Development Report argues that strengthening legitimate state institutions 
and their ability to provide stability, justice, security, and jobs mitigates risks of repeated cycles of 
conflict and fragility. SP thus plays an important role in restoring confidence; transforming institutions 
that provide security, justice, and jobs; addressing external stresses; and mobilizing international support 
to overcome FCV. Through developing a national SP system that protects Somalia’s most vulnerable 
populations across the country, the project would restore a sense of identity to individuals and confidence 
in the ability of the state to deliver services and improve social inclusion and equity. This, in turn, would 
contribute to the objectives of state building. 
57. 
The World Bank SP diagnostic work in Somalia provides relevant lessons for policy formulation 
and programming. These emphasize that regularity and predictability of cash assistance are critical for 
protecting beneficiary households from resorting to harmful or negative coping strategies and enabling 
them to meet basic needs and invest in human capital and livelihood enhancement opportunities.32 
Therefore, humanitarian cash assistance can support a government-led safety net system but not replace 
it. Second, trust and transparency in the delivery system by the people are critical for its success and 
scalability. Thus, it is important to design and implement safety net programs with deep understanding of 
political economy dynamics, which inform necessary measures that foster trust, accountability, and 
transparency.  
 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
58. 
MoLSA would be the primary institutional home for the SNHCP and responsible for project 
implementation. The SNHCP would be implemented through MoLSA’s existing structures, supported by 
                                            
32 Rift Valley Institute. 2017. Remittances and Vulnerability in Somalia. Nairobi, Kenya 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
23
 
 
the PIU, as described in Component 3. The SP section of MoLSA would be responsible for the day-to-day 
management of the project and will report to the Minister of Labor and Social Affairs.  
59. 
The PIU structures at the federal level would be as follows. The PIU at the federal level will be 
headed by a project manager/coordinator and will include an operations officer, a communications 
officer, an MIS officer, a GRM and social specialist, an M&E officer, an FM officer, and a procurement 
officer. Capacity building at the FMS level will be phased in and a support structure at FMS level would be 
determined in discussion with state governments. This may include support structure for key technical 
functions such as M&E, GRM and social risk monitoring, and communications.  
60. 
MoLSA would sign service contracts with WFP and UNICEF to support the implementation of 
Components 1 and 2, respectively. These service contracts will follow the ‘Standard Form of Agreement 
for Use by World Bank Borrowers: Delivery of Output Service Contract.’ Detailed implementation 
arrangements are described in annex 1.  
61. 
WFP was selected to support the FGS implement the cash transfers (Component 1) due to its 
experience and track record of implementing cash-based transfers in Somalia and globally. WFP has 
been implementing cash-based transfers in Somalia since 2012, starting with the use of paper vouchers 
and gradually shifting to multipurpose cash-based transfers since 2015.33 To optimize processes, since 
February 2015, WFP Somalia moved to using SCOPE,34 a digital beneficiary and transfer management 
platform that supports WFP’s operational cycles from beginning to end. Due to the lack of a base registry, 
widespread incidents of gatekeepers, and poor regulations of financial institutions in Somalia, WFP chose 
to use biometric signatures for authenticating delivery of transfers. The use of biometric signatures 
provides beneficiaries, donors, and government partners the assurance that WFP assistance will reach the 
intended beneficiaries. SCOPE offers offline capabilities for challenging environments with poor Internet 
connectivity. WFP has the largest beneficiary registry in Somalia containing about 5.6 million individuals. 
The registry is dynamic and gets updated frequently. To enhance preparedness for delivery of cash-based 
transfers, WFP currently has agreements with a total of around 1,000 retailers and cash withdrawal points 
(combined) across the country with potential for expansion based on demand. This network of service 
providers enables beneficiaries to use e-transfers on their SCOPE card to receive their cash assistance 
from a local service provider.  
62. 
UNICEF is also uniquely positioned to support the FGS to establish the key building blocks of 
safety net delivery systems and support institutional capacity building (Component 2). UNICEF’s 
strategic priorities in Somalia includes a commitment to support the FGS to build a government-led SP 
system, reflected in its Country Programme Document (2018–2020). As such, UNICEF has been supporting 
the FGS to establish a fit-for-purpose national SP system on the ground, building on its in-depth knowledge 
of and long-term operational presence in Somalia. To that end, it has supported MoLSA, in collaboration 
with other partners, to develop the National Social Protection Policy. Moreover, UNICEF is well placed to 
support delivery systems and institutional capacity, as it is the lead agency within the UN country team 
focused on strengthening local authorities’ capacity for social service delivery at the district level. In 
addition, UNICEF supports institutional building and service delivery at the FMS, district, and community 
                                            
33 WFP experience has indicated that the delivery of paper vouchers from Nairobi to different field locations, and the subsequent 
manual reconciliation of redeemed vouchers had a high management cost and logistics complexities. 
34 It is a cloud-based solution used for biometric registration of beneficiaries, intervention setup, distribution planning, 
entitlement transfers, and distribution reporting. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
24
 
 
levels for long-term human capital development, including health to nutrition; education; water, 
sanitation, and hygiene; and child protection. UNICEF has recently augmented its in-house technical 
expertise in the social policy, equity, and gender section to ensure evidence-based technical and impartial 
quality advice to the FGS and the sector. Further, UNICEF can leverage its global experience and expertise 
to technically support and operationalize a nationwide SP system in high-risk environments such as 
Somalia, supported by in-house technical experts at headquarters and regional offices. This will enrich the 
opportunities for the FGS to learn from regional experience.  
 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
63. 
MoLSA would have overall responsibility for monitoring and supervision of project activities, 
supported by WFP and UNICEF. A dedicated M&E officer will be hired by the MoLSA PIU to lead project 
M&E and would report to the project manager. WFP and UNICEF will ensure timely and quality monitoring 
of the activities and would report on progress and challenges/issues to MoLSA. MoLSA will provide the 
World Bank with semiannual progress reports, including social management plan implementation reports 
and quarterly financial reports. These reports are to be submitted 45 days after the end of each reporting 
period. In addition, MoLSA will hire a TPM agency to undertake quarterly monitoring and verification of 
the cash transfer component. This will include verification of the targeting mechanism, beneficiary 
identity verification, compliance of the payment delivery agents, and beneficiary feedback. The quarterly 
TPM exercise will be conducted on a sample of beneficiaries with a focus on high-risk areas and will include 
visits to payment sites as well as to beneficiaries’ homes. 
64. 
A targeting evaluation would be undertaken during the first year of implementation. The 
purpose would be to assess the accuracy of the targeting and distribution of beneficiaries and benefits, 
and to measure the soundness of the targeting approach under Component 1. The results of the 
evaluation would be used to inform and adjust the targeting approach under Component 1, and also 
provide input to the dialogue and design of the national program’s targeting methodology under 
Component 2.  
C. Sustainability 
65. 
The project seeks to target the poorest households, those whose living standards are estimated 
to be at half of the national poverty line. Therefore, the transfers will improve the standard of living of 
the poorest and most vulnerable households and protect them from shocks (that is, droughts). It is 
expected that cash transfers will also diminish the depth of poverty for these communities, with a slight 
reduction in extreme poverty. Due to this improvement, the poverty gap index of the targeted 
communities is expected to be slightly reduced contributing to the overall reduction in extreme poverty 
for the targeted households. 
66. 
The SNHCP will lay the foundations for a government-led national SSN system and will 
strengthen capacities at the FGS and FMS levels to manage and implement it. Building human capital is 
a pathway to resilience and a sustainable investment. At the community and household levels, resilience 
involves investing in communities’ and households’ ability to cope with shocks and crises and to invest in 
their human capital (health and education), productive livelihoods, and community assets. Although 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
25
 
 
strengthening systemwide resilience will be gradual and is expected to evolve as the Government’s 
capacity expands, this project is a first step in that direction. 
67. 
By developing a social registry, a future SP program is likely to achieve cost efficiencies and 
improve transparency. The new system is expected to reduce transaction costs and wait times for 
beneficiaries and reduce duplication across programs. It will also generate more usable information for 
policy makers, who currently have little more than aggregate statistics and periodic household sample 
surveys with which to evaluate program performance and impact. It is also expected to improve the 
coordination and targeting effectiveness of the humanitarian interventions during shocks. 
68. 
Given the current low revenue base of Somalia, it is expected that the project will initially 
depend on external funding. To ensure fiscal sustainability of the national program in the long run, it 
would be important to incorporate provisions in the public budget to gradually phase in public 
contributions for the program, as government revenue collection improves. Another aspect of 
sustainability is that building institutional ownership and capacity will encourage development partners, 
including humanitarian agencies, to contribute financing to the program instead of implementing 
separate projects outside government systems and the national budget. Once a government-owned SSN 
program is functional and trusted, it will provide a platform for international partners to shift toward a 
well-targeted national social assistance mechanism, aligning with and contributing to the Government’s 
social and economic agenda. Beneficiary feedback assessment will be carried out to understand their 
experiences with the processes and the effect of transfers on households’ nutritional outcomes. 
 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis (if applicable) 
Technical Analysis 
69. 
Strategic relevance. Repeated shocks, such as widespread droughts, lead to an increase in risks 
faced by the poor and vulnerable. Even a temporary loss of income because of a shock can lead vulnerable 
households to fall into poverty without strategies to build up their resilience and protect their human 
capital, further depleting their productive assets. This project will establish the foundation for a 
sustainable safety net system that can help poor and vulnerable households and those affected by 
malnutrition and repeated shocks in the short and medium term.  
70. 
Technical soundness. The project will provide cash transfers to 200,000 households (equivalent 
to about 1.2 million people) with mothers and children under five years, in selected rural districts. Based 
on the 2014 population data, target districts will account for 18 percent of all children under the age of 
five years, 24 percent of the rural population, and 26 percent of all IDPs. By targeting the rural poor, the 
project will complement humanitarian interventions that focus largely on urban areas with concentrated 
IDP camps. By building the resilience of the rural poor, the project will reduce the rural to urban migration 
during droughts and lessen the burden on humanitarian assistance in the medium to longer term. The 
project’s emphasis on developing the social registry would allow future national safety net programs to 
be shock-responsive by facilitating rapid identification of potential beneficiaries for expanded coverage. 
It would also support enhanced coordination among relevant government institutions and humanitarian 
and development partners for services delivery, leading to improved efficiency of interventions.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
26
 
 
71. 
Cash provides liquidity to allow the purchase of food and basic necessities and potentially inputs 
for productive investment that alter production possibilities. Helping households to become more food 
secure and resilient to droughts is an important long-term aim of the SNHCP. The project also focuses on 
building human capital in a phased approach, as delivery systems and procedures are developed. 
Beneficiaries of the cash transfers will be supported to access preventative and curative nutritional 
services that are delivered by humanitarian agencies, which is expected to improve the nutrition outcome 
of beneficiary mothers and children.  
72. 
Beneficiary targeting is based on objective criteria associated with poverty, risks of experiencing 
droughts, and food security/nutrition vulnerability. Mothers and children under five years35 are targeted 
to address the malnutrition challenge and invest in the early years that are critical for human development 
and children’s future prospects and productivity. 
73. 
MoLSA will engage WFP to support the implementation of the cash transfers and UNICEF to 
support the building blocks of a government-led national SP and capacity building to enable future direct 
implementation by the FGS. Beneficiary database and case management will be supported by WFP and 
eventually transferred to MoLSA once the social registry and data protection policy are established (with 
support under Component 2) and in agreement with member states. UNICEF will provide TA for the 
development of safety net delivery systems. UNICEF will also support the development of a governance 
structure that defines the roles and responsibilities and governance and implementation relationships 
between federal level and member states, and across ministries in delivering and managing SSN programs. 
These will be developed in a participatory and consultative process at all levels and will determine the 
implementation arrangement and governance structure of the future national safety net program.36 
Terms of references (TORs) for consultancy firms and/or individuals will be developed with UNICEF’s TA 
support and input from MoLSA and WFP (to reflect lessons from Component 1).  
74. 
Payment agents will be encouraged to expand their outreach network to minimize the travel 
distance for beneficiaries. Beneficiaries can also formally authorize another family member to collect 
benefits on their behalf. They have the option to collect their benefits in cash or have it transferred to 
their mobile wallets (for those who have access to a secure mobile phone). Under Component 2, the 
project will support a shift to mobile payment, in coordination with the World Bank-funded SCALED-UP 
project, which is supporting the regulations of mobile companies and the foundational ID system. 
Accountability and risks of leakage/fraud will be mitigated through a multilayered implementation and 
monitoring process, including (a) securing biometrically enhanced beneficiary identification, (b) 
transferring an electronic beneficiary list to the payment agency through secure data exchange protocols 
(supported by SCOPE), (c) using the GRM to address grievances/complaints, and (d) contracting a TPM 
agency which will assess beneficiaries’ experience with regard to the benefits received as well as the 
delivery processes. 
75. 
Gender. The proposed cash transfer project is expected to have a positive impact on targeted 
poor and vulnerable households, especially females. It is envisioned that in the longer term, cash transfers 
under Component 1 would help to smooth consumption gaps, increase food consumption, reduce 
                                            
35 Targeting of beneficiaries will include measures to include those with disability, IDPs, expectant mothers, and female-headed 
households.  
36 Consultations will include Somalia’s development partners, NGOs, civil society organizations, and the private sector, as relevant. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
27
 
 
prevalence of malnutrition, secure basic needs, diversify livelihoods, and lead to investments in human 
capital and economic participation. Of the total 200,000 beneficiary households, the vast majority of the 
direct recipients of the cash transfers would be pregnant and lactating women and mothers or the primary 
female caregiver of children under the age of five years. This is expected to contribute to addressing the 
gender gap in accessing socioeconomic opportunities and to enhance women’s decision-making power in 
the household and community. As women will also be linked to nutrition services, it is further expected 
that this will contribute to improved nutrition welfare of mothers and children, thereby supporting human 
capital accumulation at the household level.  
76. 
Field facilitation will be supported by NGOs, including women staff, to ensure effective outreach 
to female beneficiaries. Therefore, the TPM agency and GRM will include female workers to also reach 
women and ensure that they are able to voice any potential concerns or complaints in a safe environment. 
Finally, the program was designed to reduce negative coping mechanisms by targeting support to poor 
and vulnerable households in rural areas, as women and girls often move to urban areas and IDP camps 
during shocks and may be exposed to GBV and sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA). While the project is 
likely to increase household resilience and address a number of factors that may otherwise exacerbate 
GBV risks, there is potential that project activities, particularly cash transfers, may increase exposure to 
GBV and in particular to SEA. To address these risks, the project will adopt robust GBV risk mitigation 
measures to prevent incidents from occurring (as detailed in the environment and social section below).  
77. 
Climate change adaptation. The proposed project has been screened for short- and long-term 
climate change and disaster risks. The climate vulnerability of the project was identified, and climate 
adaptation measures considered in the project design. The proposed project would build the resilience of 
households through provision of emergency cash transfers, as it would enable them meet urgent needs 
and mitigate drought risks, as well as avoid negative coping mechanisms that could be harmful to the 
climate. Further, the SNHCP would improve the shock responsiveness of the safety net system in Somalia, 
which is increasingly affected by frequent devastating droughts occasioned by climate change. For 
example, the social registry would eventually contribute to a system more responsive to shocks through 
better identification and categorization of beneficiaries. The expanded coverage of potential beneficiaries 
in the future would also enable identification for other service delivery interventions, beyond SSN, for 
example nutrition services, social, and economic inclusion services, further contributing to improved 
resilience and human capital accumulation of poor and vulnerable households.  
Economic Analysis 
78. 
The economic analysis of the nutrition-linked cash transfer component shows that the level of 
transfer is likely to have a positive impact on the level of poverty and food insecurity in Somalia. Further, 
it is commensurate with international experience. The benefit level would be set to US$20 per household 
per month, which is equivalent to US$240 per household per year. This benefit size is based on estimates 
and initial data on prices of the MEB. While the value of the MEB varies significantly by region and season, 
rough estimates indicate that a US$20 benefit would cover about 70 percent of the MEB, based on the 
December 2018 price data. Targeted beneficiaries will be covered by nutrition-linked cash transfers for 12 
months. 
79. 
The average poverty gap in Somalia is 29 percent, indicating that the average consumption level 
of a poor Somali is about 71 percent of the international poverty line. While almost three-fourths of the 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
28
 
 
population in rural areas, IDP settlements, Mogadishu, and among nomads are poor according to survey 
estimates, poverty is deeper in rural areas and IDP settlements (34 percent for both), compared to 
Mogadishu (27 percent, p<0.1) and other urban areas (24 percent, p<0.05). A large share of Somalis living 
in poverty, together with a large gap between their consumption expenditure and the poverty line 
indicates that many of the poor are far from overcoming poverty and would need a substantial increase 
in their consumption to bring it to the poverty line.  
80. 
The needs of the poor and most vulnerable in Somalia are therefore significant, and the 
situation worsens in times of drought. The SNHCP with its contribution of US$65 million would cover 
200,000 households (approximately 1.2 million people) with the nutrition-linked cash transfer program.37 
This project would also establish a foundation for a sustainable safety net system that can help poor and 
vulnerable households and those affected by malnutrition.  
81. 
The economic benefits of the proposed SNHCP would include both protective and productive 
benefits to households. These will include (a) improvements in household well-being because of 
consumption smoothing (through cash transfers) and (b) enhancements in access to nutrition services 
that will augment human capital development in the short and long term. 
82. 
Level of transfers compared to basic food needs. The project includes a transfer of US$240 per 
year per beneficiary household, which is an average of about US$40 per household member per year. This 
represents about 7.1 percent of the national poverty and 70 percent of the MEB. 
83. 
Impact of safety net activities on poverty. The project seeks to target the poorest of poor 
households, those whose living standards are estimated to be at one-half of the national poverty line. 
Therefore, the transfers will improve their standard of living and protect them from a shock (drought). 
The depth of poverty for these communities will diminish and extreme poverty will be reduced slightly. 
Due to this improvement, the poverty gap index of the targeted communities will be slightly reduced. An 
increased benefit amount would have stronger poverty impacts. However, this would create negative 
incentives for labor participation and productivity. Further, it would mean that fewer beneficiaries could 
be covered, which would increase exclusion and risk exacerbating tensions within the communities.  
84. 
By developing a social registry, the project is likely to achieve cost efficiencies and improve 
transparency. The new system is expected to reduce transaction costs and wait times for beneficiaries 
and reduce duplication of paperwork across programs. It will also generate more usable information for 
policy makers, who currently have little more than aggregate statistics and periodic household sample 
surveys with which to evaluate program performance and impact. 
B. Fiduciary 
 
(i)    Financial Management 
85. 
The proposed project will be implemented by the FGS with technical and implementation 
support from WFP and UNICEF. Technical and FM assessments of both WFP and UNICEF were conducted 
in line with the Financial Management Framework Agreement (FMFA) between the World Bank and the 
                                            
37 This is estimated to cover about 13 percent of the poor, assuming a population of 12 million Somalis and 77 percent poverty 
rate.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
29
 
 
UN. As part of design and appraisal, an in-depth assessment of end-to-end cash transfer business 
processes and technical design assessment of the cash transfer component have been undertaken to be 
implemented through support of WFP. The purpose of this in-depth assessment was to identify key risks 
and possible cash transfer systems strengthening interventions, design improvements, and the risk 
mitigation measures. The FM systems and arrangements will include budgeting; accounting; internal 
controls; funds flow; financial reporting and internal and external auditing arrangements; FM staffing; and 
risks management and related policies, procedures, and practices. The objective of the assessment was 
to ascertain that the FM and cash transfer systems will facilitate the preparation of regular, timely, and 
reliable financial statements and will support the provision of a complete, true, and fair record of all 
transactions and balances, safeguard assets, and internal and external auditing arrangements, in line with 
World Bank FM policies and internationally accepted standards. 
86. 
In view of the specific context and the operating environment in Somalia, the combined overall 
fiduciary risk for the project is assessed as High. The High risk rating is largely attributable to (a) country-
specific weak and evolving rudimentary funds flow and banking systems particularly at the 
implementation level in Somalia, characterized by potential anti-money laundering and anti-terrorism 
financing risks; (b) inadequate public financial management (PFM) and cash transfer management 
capacities at the implementing agency and community level to spend and account for the funds correctly 
and on time; (c) limited access to the project sites at the local level due to security constraints; and (d) 
potential beneficiary inclusion and exclusion errors in the context of the emergency situation.  
87. 
Proposed ongoing measures to mitigate the identified risks: (a) strengthening the existing 
beneficiaries’ identification and enrolment systems through the use of biometric systems as a way of 
identifying beneficiaries at enrolment and payment check points; (b) strengthening the existing 
framework agreements with third-party payment service providers to facilitate delivery of payments and 
services, in particular, practical measures to minimize liquidity challenges; (c) deploying TPM 
arrangements complemented by field-based monitors; and (d) agreeing with the Government and WFP 
to ensure utilization of banking institutions supervised by recognized regimes. The World Bank will also 
carry out regular joint implementation support reviews of the project, led by the Government with 
support of WFP and UNICEF. The proposed interim risk mitigation measures will further be strengthened 
as part of the design and appraisal process with the overall aim of strengthening country institutional 
capacities, systems, policies, and procedures.  
88. 
Given the consideration for use of country systems (UCS), the project will adopt the UCS in 
various aspects of the project’s FM, including budgeting, accounting and reporting, banking, and 
oversight arrangements with the Office of the Auditor General. This will be supported by TA with clear 
requirements for knowledge transfer incorporated in the TORs. Similar to other World Bank-supported 
operations, the External Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS) units, established within the Offices of the 
Accountant General at the FGS and FMS, will be charged with the project’s overall FM responsibility for 
all projects financed by either the Somalia Multi Partner Fund or IDA resources at the FGS and FMS, whose 
performances thus far has been satisfactory. With overall guidance from the accountant general(s) and 
the EAFS units, the respective PIUs will continue to provide day-to-day FM of the project. The effectiveness 
of the EAFS unit alongside other key functional units will be continuously monitored while key areas of 
capacity strengthening will be identified and supported through the project. The existing organizational 
and functional structure of the EAFS units are expected to be maintained and further strengthened to 
provide effective FM support to the project.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
30
 
 
89. 
All project FM transactions will be recognized, captured, recorded, analyzed, summarized, and 
reported through the Government’s Financial MIS. The EAFS units with support of the Accountant 
General will ensure that  
(a) 
All important business and financial processes are adhered to, 
(b) 
Adequate internal controls and procedures are in place and adequately enforced, 
(c) 
Unaudited interim financial reports (IFRs) are prepared on time, 
(d) 
All statements of expenditure from UNICEF and WFP are consolidated and submitted to the 
World Bank on time,  
(e) 
Project financial statements are prepared on time and in accordance with International 
Public-Sector Accounting Standards cash basis, and  
(f) 
External audit is completed on time and audit findings and recommendations/issues raised 
in the Management Letter are implemented expeditiously. 
 
  (ii)   Procurement 
90. 
Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the requirements in the ‘Procurement 
Regulations for IPF Borrowers: Goods, Works, Non-Consulting and Consulting Services dated July 1, 2016 
(revised November 2017 and August 2018)’; ‘Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and 
Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants (revised as of July 1, 2016)’; and 
provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement. Given Somalia’s FCV country status, procurement will 
be processed under the special procurement arrangements referred to under paragraph 12 of Section III 
of the World Bank Policy on Investment Project Financing dated September 30, 2018.  
91. 
The main procurement activities under this project will include contracting of specialized UN 
agencies, namely WFP and UNICEF, to support the FGS in the implementation of Components 1 and 2. 
Other procurement activities will include procurement of goods and services by MoLSA, mainly under 
Component 3.  
92. 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) and Procurement Plan (PP). According to 
the requirement of the procurement regulations, the recipient has developed a PPSD, based on which the 
PP for the first 18 months has also been prepared. The PP sets out the selection methods to be followed 
by the borrower during the project implementation in the procurement of goods, works, and consulting 
services. The PP will also include the cost estimates, time schedules, the World Bank’s review 
requirements, brief description of the activities/contracts, and so on. The PP will be updated at least every 
12 months, or as required to reflect the actual project implementation needs, but each update shall 
require World Bank Group approval. All PPs will be publicly disclosed in accordance with World Bank 
Group disclosure policy.  
93. 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP). The World Bank Group’s STEP system 
will be used to prepare, clear, and update PPs and conduct all procurement transactions for the project. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
31
 
 
The system allows the systematic planning and tracking of procurement activities throughout the project 
cycle, including online collaboration with clients and recording service level standards through workflow. 
The PIUs will be trained on using STEP. 
C. Legal Operational Policies 
. 
. 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
No 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 
No 
. 
D. Environmental and Social 
 
94. 
Potential environmental and social risks and impacts have been screened and been assessed to 
be minimal on the environment, but Component 1 holds substantial risks for the human population. 
Given that the project will be implemented in areas of fragility due to endemic poverty, acute drought 
and protracted conflict and insecurity, directly accessing vulnerable beneficiaries will require careful 
planning. Security risks and difficulty in accessing rural Somalia make stakeholder engagement effective 
and community participation challenging. As such, the primary challenge for the project is ensuring that 
cash transfers reach the most vulnerable eligible community members such as minority groups, people 
with disabilities, or widows. In addition, gender dynamics in Somalia can be restrictive for women and 
children (the target beneficiaries) and the nature of the project could potentially exacerbate GBV through 
providing opportunities for exploitation of vulnerable women. The implementing agency, MoLSA, has 
been assessed as having limited capacity to apply the World Bank's Environmental and Social Framework 
on the project. For these reasons, the social risks have been assessed to be Substantial. 
95. 
To overcome the clients’ limited capacity and effectively manage the project-related risks 
outlined, the project will rely on high-capacity partners: WFP and UNICEF. WFP will be the FGS’s 
implementing partner for Component 1 and hence responsible for managing the majority of project risks. 
WFP has a proven track record in effectively implementing unconditional cash transfers, including in rural 
areas in Somalia and has developed mitigation mechanisms for all of the risks identified in paragraph 114 
below and applied them in their standard operating procedures. Central to WFP’s process for managing 
social risks are detailed requirements for robust and meaningful community consultations and a 
functioning GRM which has been in operation and under near continuous evaluation in Somalia for a 
number of years. In addition, WFP has developed a robust and multitiered project monitoring approach 
which is required for all of their operations in Somalia and will be used on this project. TPM agencies will 
also be used to provide independent verification of results.  
96. 
A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared which includes (a) stakeholder 
identification and analysis, (b) planning for stakeholder engagement, (c) consultations and disclosures, (d) 
communication and sensitization campaigns, (e) participatory citizen engagements, and (f) grievance 
redressal systems. The SEP draws upon the experience and expertise of WFP and UNICEF as the 
implementing partners, because they have a better understanding of the local context and have existing 
implementing systems. The client will maintain and disclose a documented record of all stakeholder 
engagement activities. The SEP includes mechanisms for setting out a GRM which will help the 
beneficiaries/affected individuals to express their concerns and grievances and enable the borrower to 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
32
 
 
address them effectively. This will involve the GRM that is currently in use for similar activities by WFP 
being adopted for the project. Greater detail on the GRM is provided in the section below.  
97. 
As the districts in which the project will operate have not yet been identified, and NGOs with 
intimate understanding of local sociocultural sensitivities are not yet in place, community consultations 
have not yet been undertaken in the preparation of this SEP. Instead the risks identified for this analysis 
were gleaned from WFP’s past experience in implementing unconditional cash transfers in rural areas of 
Somalia and elsewhere. Due to this experience and the nature of the intervention (cash transfers), the 
lack of community consultations to date is not expected to have significant adverse impact on the project. 
Once the NGOs, who are central to the strong consultative process which underpins the WFP targeting 
process are on board, the SEP will be updated to reflect any changes necessary.  
98. 
The project shall ensure that any e-waste generated from project funding is segregated from 
other forms of waste and is taken to licensed refurbishers, collection centers or recyclers. Details to guide 
this should be included in the Project Operations Manual.  
99. 
The project will be implemented in areas of fragility due to endemic poverty, acute drought and 
protracted conflict and insecurity which makes direct access to beneficiaries challenging. Against this 
backdrop, the major social challenges identified are: 
a)  Security: Conflict and insecurity remain persistent challenges in Somalia and have, in the past, 
impeded delivery of drought relief services. Ensuring security for project operations (including 
the handling of cash) amid armed groups in a region with a recent history of relative lawlessness 
and the potential for increased conflict due to the drought, will remain a significant challenge. 
Delivery points cash transfers may be targeted by opportunistic armed actors including Al-
Shabaab. This general insecurity may impact both the project workers and beneficiaries. In 
addition, the presence of security services in the project area can pose a threat to the 
community through violence, exploitation and abuse. 
• 
Mitigation: By design, the project will only operate in relatively permissive parts of 
the country, with security of operations and access to site for monitoring and 
supervision key criteria in the selection of districts for support. Further, the choice 
of WFP and UNICEF as key implementing partners provides the project access to 
the UNs system and local capacity for identifying and managing security threats to 
operations. UNDSS provides overarching security for all UN agencies. In addition, 
WFP has security officers in all of the regions who oversee the security of the WFP 
operations. These systems are tried and tested on projects such as this. They work 
in all districts except those controlled by armed groups and as such have established 
systems for managing the security of their operations. Moreover, the WFP service 
agreement with project service providers contain a contractual obligation for the 
service provider and any contracted security to uphold humanitarian principles 
such as “do no harm” and to protect beneficiaries (from violence, exploitation and 
abuse). They also contain an obligation to ensure the security of their own 
personnel or workers by implementing appropriate risk prevention and mitigation 
strategies to reduce the likelihood of a harmful event occurring and to mitigate the 
impact of a security event if it were to occur. The WFP have developed a Safe 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P171346) 
 
 
 
33
 
 
Distribution Guidelines which outline their requirements and provide training to 
contracted entities in their use. 
b) Exclusion: The security and other challenges associated with working in rural Somalia make 
effective stakeholder engagement and community participation very challenging. As such, the 
challenges of ensuring the project reaches vulnerable community members (such as minorities, 
people with disabilities or widows present in any cash transfer project are amplified. 
• 
Mitigation: In Somalia, community participation has been more robust in rural 
areas than in Urban and is used extensively by WFP on like projects. The WFP 
guidelines for community participation (adopted by the Somalia Food Security 
Cluster) in targeting uses a community driven process for identifying vulnerable 
people at risk of exclusion. To monitor the application and effectiveness of the 
targeting process the WFP carries out their own monitoring, of this system and 
where they are unable to carry out their own monitoring they use a monitoring 
contractor. Monitoring reports will be included in the SMP along with a detailed 
description of this process. 
c) Selection: The project targets women and children at risk of malnutrition due to the drought. 
As such gender and other cultural dynamics will need to be managed to ensure transferred cash 
being captured by spouses, family, nominated caregivers, community leaders or armed groups 
but instead makes it to the intended beneficiaries.  
• 
Mitigation: WFP carries out periodic evaluations of intrahousehold dynamics 
including in Somalia seeking to better observe and understand this effect. After 10 
years of administering cash transfer operations, WFP monitoring has not revealed 
an increase in intrahousehold abuse of the system including among spouses, family 
members or caregivers. However, this does remain of potential concern and hence 
WFP 
monthly 
monitoring 
screens 
for 
this 
effect.  
External capture has been observed both in terms of soliciting kickbacks and 
favoring one group of beneficiaries. To combat this, the WFP has developed a 
robust and multitiered monitoring system including hotline for anonymous reports. 
Where offenders are individuals, they are dismissed, or where the problem is 
systemic, contracts with implementing partners may be terminated and the matter 
is addressed with local authorities. Note WFP has not encountered this impact in 
their operations in Somalia. As WFP has a requirement to monitor their operations, 
they do not work in areas controlled by armed groups in Somalia. Similarly, capture 
by armed groups has not been a problem observed in parts of