 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD3448  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT 
ON A 
PROPOSED GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 18.3 MILLION 
(US$ 25.0 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA  
 
FOR A 
 
SOMALI INTEGRATED STATISTICS AND ECONOMIC PLANNING CAPACITY BUILDING 
PROJECT 
 
June 9, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Poverty and Equity Global Practice 
Africa Region 
 
 
 
 
   
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective April 30, 2020) 
 
Currency Unit = Somali Shilling (SOS) 
SOS 576 = US$1 
US$1 = SDR 0.73 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 – December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Hafez M. H. Ghanem 
Country Director: Carlos Felipe Jaramillo 
Regional Director: Asad Alam 
Practice Manager: Pierella Paci 
Task Team Leaders: R. Wendy Karamba, John Randa 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
ADP 
AIMS 
Accelerated Data Program 
Aid Information and Management System 
CAPI 
Computer-Aided Personal Interviewing 
CBS 
CLEAR 
COAPM 
Central Bank of Somalia 
Center for Learning on Evaluation and Results 
Comprehensive Operations and Accounting Procedure Manual 
CoC 
Code of Conduct 
COVID-19 
Coronavirus disease 
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework  
CPI 
Consumer Price Index  
DA 
Designated Account  
DDI 
Data Documentation Initiative 
DLI 
Disbursement Linked Indicator  
DNS 
Directorate of National Statistics 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section  
EPAU 
Economic Policy Analysis Unit  
ESCP 
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan 
ESRS 
ESS 
Environmental and Social Review Summary 
Environmental and Social Standards 
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict and Violence 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia  
FM 
Financial Management  
FMSs 
Federal Member States 
FY 
Fiscal Year 
GBV 
Gender-Based Violence 
GDP 
GPS 
Gross Domestic Product  
Global Positioning System 
GRS 
HECRA 
Grievance Redress Service 
Administrative Records Quality Assessment Tool  
HIPC 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries  
IBES 
Integrated Business Establishment Survey  
IBRD 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
ICT 
Information and Communications Technology 
IDA 
International Development Association 
IDP 
Internally Displaced Person 
IFRs 
Interim un-audited Financial Reports  
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
IPF 
Investment Project Financing  
IPSAS 
International Public-Sector Accounting Standards  
ISA 
International Standards on Auditing  
JGDF 
Joint Government and Development Partners Forum 
 
 
 
LMP 
Labor Management Procedures 
LSMS 
Living Standards Measurement Study  
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation  
MDAs 
Ministries, Departments and Public Agencies 
MED 
MEFF 
Monitoring and Evaluation Directorate 
Medium-term Economic and Fiscal Framework 
MoA 
Ministry of Agriculture 
MoF 
Ministry of Finance 
MoPIED 
MoU 
Ministry of Planning, Investment & Economic Development  
Memoranda of Understanding 
MPS 
Market Price Survey 
NADA 
NDP 
Natonal Data Archive 
National Development Plan 
NEA 
National Economic Advisors 
NEC 
National Economic Council  
NGO 
NPF 
Non-Governmental Organization 
New Procurement Framework 
NSDS 
National Strategy for the Development of Statistics  
NSO 
National Statistics Office  
NSS 
National statistical system  
OPM 
Office of the Prime Minister 
PDO 
Project Development Objective  
PESS 
Population and Estimation Survey (of the 18 pre-war regions) of Somalia 
PFS 
Project Financial Statements  
PFM 
Public Financial Management 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit  
POM 
Project Operations Manual  
PP 
PPA 
Procurement Plan  
Public Procurement, Concessions and Disposal Act 
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development  
PRSP 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
PSC 
PSU 
Project Steering Committee  
Primary Sampling Units 
RTDM 
SAI 
SAN 
Real-time Data Monitoring 
Supreme Audit Institution 
Storage Area Network 
SBR 
Statistical Business Register  
SCD 
Systematic Country Diagnostic 
SCI 
Statistical Capacity Indicator 
SCoA 
Standard Chart of Accounts  
SEF 
SFMIS 
Stakeholder Engagement Framework 
Somalia Financial Management Information System 
SLHS 
Somaliland Household Survey 
SHFS 
Somali High Frequency Survey  
 
 
 
SIBES 
Somali Integrated Business Establishment Survey 
SIHBS 
Somali Integrated Household Budget Survey  
SISEPCBP 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building 
Project 
SNA 
SNBS 
System of National Accounts  
Somali National Bureau of Statistics 
SOEs 
Statement of Expenditures  
SOS 
SPD 
Somali Shilling  
Standard Procurement Documents 
SSA 
Sub-Saharan Africa  
STEP 
SWgs 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
Sector Statistics Working Groups 
TA 
Technical Assistance  
TASC 
Tool for Assessing Statistical Capacity  
ToR 
Terms of Reference 
TTL 
Task Team Leader  
UCS 
Use of Country Systems 
UN 
United Nations 
UNDP 
UNSD 
United Nations Development Programme 
United Nations Statistics Division 
UPS 
Uninterruptible Power Supply 
VAT 
Value-added tax 
WBG 
WHO 
World Bank Group  
World Health Organization 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... 1 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 7 
A. Country Context................................................................................................................................ 7 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................... 8 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ............................................................................................. 13 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 14 
A. Project Development Objective ..................................................................................................... 14 
B. Project Components ....................................................................................................................... 16 
C. Project Beneficiaries ....................................................................................................................... 29 
D. Results Chain .................................................................................................................................. 30 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners ................................................................... 32 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design .................................................................... 33 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................ 34 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 34 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements......................................................................... 36 
C. Sustainability ................................................................................................................................... 36 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 37 
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ................................................................................... 37 
B. Fiduciary .......................................................................................................................................... 38 
C. Legal Operational Policies ............................................................................................................... 39 
D. Environmental and Social ............................................................................................................... 39 
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES ..................................................................................... 41 
VI. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 41 
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 44 
ANNEX 1: Institutions in the National Statistical System and Economic Planning ........... 52 
ANNEX 2: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan .......................................... 54 
ANNEX 3: Financial Management Assessment for SISEPCBP ........................................... 56 
ANNEX 4: Procurement Arrangements .......................................................................... 62 
ANNEX 5: Project Activities ........................................................................................... 67 
ANNEX 6: Strengthening Statistical Confidentiality and Micro Data Sharing ................... 71 
ANNEX 7: Somali Integrated Household Budget Survey ................................................. 72 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
     
 
 
ANNEX 8: Data Quality Framework ............................................................................... 78 
ANNEX 9: Map of the Federal Republic of Somalia ......................................................... 79 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
     
Page 1 of 79 
 
 
      
DATASHEET 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 
 BASIC INFO TABLE 
Country(ies) 
Project Name 
Somalia 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
P171160 
Investment Project 
Financing 
Moderate 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component  (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict  
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
01-Jul-2020 
31-Aug-2025 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
No 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
Strengthen the national statistical system in the collection, processing and dissemination of poverty and selected 
macro-economic data to inform development policy and poverty reduction activities. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 79  
     
 
 
Components 
 
Component Name  
Cost (US$, millions) 
 
Component 1: Strengthening coordination, statistical infrastructure and data 
development of the national statistical system  
  14.08 
 
Component 2: ICT development and equipment of the national statistical system  
   0.92 
 
Component 3: Data utilization for Monitoring, Evaluation, and Planning  
   6.50 
 
Component 4: Project management  
   3.50 
 
 
Organizations 
 
Borrower:  
 Federal Republic of Somalia  
Implementing Agency: 
 Ministry of Planning, Investment & Economic Development  
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
Total Project Cost 
25.00 
Total Financing 
25.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
25.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILS-NewFinEnh1 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
25.00 
          IDA Grant 
25.00 
 
  
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Guarantee Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
   0.00 
  25.00 
   0.00 
  25.00 
National PBA 
   0.00 
  25.00 
   0.00 
  25.00 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 79  
     
 
Total 
   0.00 
  25.00 
   0.00 
  25.00 
 
 
 
Expected Disbursements (in US$, Millions) 
 
WB Fiscal Year   
 
 
 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Annual 
 
 
 
   0.00 
   3.13 
   4.85 
   6.10 
   6.02 
   4.89 
   0.00 
Cumulative 
 
 
 
   0.00 
   3.13 
   7.98 
  14.08 
  20.11 
  25.00 
  25.00 
  
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Poverty and Equity 
Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
⚫ High 
2. Macroeconomic 
⚫ High 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ High 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ Substantial 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
⚫ High 
6. Fiduciary 
⚫ High 
7. Environment and Social 
⚫ Moderate 
8. Stakeholders 
⚫ Moderate 
9. Other 
 
10. Overall 
⚫ High 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 79  
     
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?  
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
  
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Not Currently Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Not Currently Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Not Currently Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Not Currently Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
  
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
Legal Covenants 
  
 Sections and Description 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 79  
     
 
Section I.A.1(a) of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
 
FGS to establish within one (1) months of effectiveness and maintain a Project Steering Committee, chaired by the 
Permanent Secretary of MoPIED, and comprised of representatives from DNS, MED, NEC, MoF and statistics units 
of federal-level MDAs benefiting from the Project, vested with powers, functions and competencies, acceptable to 
the Association, responsible for providing support to the PIU through policy direction and guidance, and facilitating 
inter-agencies and federal collaboration. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.A.1(b) of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
 
FGS to establish and maintain a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) led by a Project Coordinator, vested with 
powers, financial resources, functions and competencies, acceptable to the Association, in order to carry out the 
day-to-day implementation of the Project, coordinate activities with all institutional stakeholders and liaise with the 
Association and other development partners. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.A.1(c) of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
 
FGS to establish within one (1) months of effectiveness and maintain a joint government and development partners 
forum, chaired by the Director General of DNS and vested with functions and competencies, acceptable to the 
Association, to ensure consultation, coordination and fluid dialogue between the Recipient and development 
partners regarding Project activities, planning and budgeting, and review Project implementation performance. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.A.1(d) of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
 
FGS to establish within one (1) months of effectiveness and maintain a Project technical committee, chaired by the 
Director General of the DNS and vested with functions and competencies, acceptable to the Association, to assist 
the DNS with the design the questionnaires/forms and survey contents, the analysis and preparation of survey 
reports, and help with the dissemination of statistical information and monitoring and evaluation results. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Sections I.A.2 of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
 
FGS to prepare, by no later than September 30, 2020, and then implement, a time-bound, institutional 
development action plan for the establishment and operationalization of the Somali National Bureau of Statistics, 
and the handover of Project implementation responsibilities from MoPIED to SNBS Board, all in a manner and 
substance satisfactory to the Association . 
 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.A.3 of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
 
Prior to implementing any activities benefiting any MDA in an FMS, FGS to enter into an MoU with the respective 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 79  
     
 
MDA establishing the terms of the assistance/support to be provided and the required cooperation and 
coordination responsibilities of the parties. 
 
 
 
 
 
Conditions 
  
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
Article IV.  Section 4.01. 
a) Recipient has established the Project Implementation Unit 
pursuant to paragraph 1.(b) of Section I.A of Schedule 2 to this Agreement, in a manner and 
substance satisfactory to the Association. 
 
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
Article IV.  Section 4.01. 
b) Recipient has prepared and adopted the Project 
Operations Manual pursuant to paragraph 1.(a) of Section I.B of Schedule 2 to this 
Agreement, in manner and substance satisfactory to the Association; 
 
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
Article IV.  Section 4.01. 
c)  Recipient has established a grievance redressal mechanism 
pursuant to paragraph 3 of Section I.D of Schedule 2 to this Agreement, in a manner and 
substance satisfactory to the Association; 
 
Type 
Description 
Effectiveness 
Article IV.  Section 4.01. 
d)  Recipient has prepared, adopted and disclosed the 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan pursuant ot the provisions of the ESCP and in conformity with 
the requirements of the ESSs, in manner and substance satisfactory to the Association. 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 79  
     
 
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
 
A. Country Context 
 
1. 
The Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) has made remarkable progress toward consolidation of peace, 
political stability and rebuilding the economy over the past three years. Despite the progress, economic growth 
remains too low to keep up with the population growth and per capita income was US$339 in 2019. Sixty-nine percent 
of the population lives on less than US$1.90 per day per capita, in 2011 purchasing power parity. Poverty is even more 
prevalent and deeper among hard to reach populations such as rural residents and nomads. Given their remoteness and 
mobility, their poverty is also multidimensional due to lower access to basic services such as education and improved 
water and sanitation. The levels of socioeconomic achievement in the country remain low in many domains. Only one 
third of primary school-aged children are enrolled in the education system, half of the population is literate, and women 
have less educational attainment than men across nearly all age-groups. Natural disasters, conflict and displacement 
affect large fractions of the population, leaving internally displaced persons to face unique challenges beyond poverty 
including tenure insecurity and spatial dislocation from social networks and former livelihoods. With most Somalis 
vulnerable to many forms of shocks, especially those related to climate change, building resilience is essential. 
2. 
Due to high and unsustainable debt levels and limited access to international financial resources, enormous 
challenges lie ahead for poverty reduction and shared prosperity in Somalia. Somalia has been heavily indebted with 
US$5.2 billion of external debt.1 Debt had restricted Somalia from borrowing from International Financial Institutions 
for projects that can produce lasting positive development change. The FGS recently prepared the National 
Development Plan 9 (NDP9) for the period 2020–2024, which served as an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
and is an important step for debt relief under a World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) initiative known as 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC).  
3. 
The FGS recently made significant strides towards accessing international resources aimed at promoting 
economic growth and reducing poverty. The FGS cleared its arrears to the International Development Association (IDA) 
in March 2020. This clearance of IDA arrears allowed Somalia to strengthen its financial relationship with the World Bank 
Group, fully reestablished its access to new resources from IDA and paved the way to receive debt relief under the 
Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) initiative and the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative.2  
4. 
The successful preparation and implementation of a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), which is 
necessary to obtain full debt relief, requires a sustainable and reliable statistical system to track the poverty reduction 
strategy, macroeconomic and structural reform programs. However, the existing National Statistical System (NSS) is 
weak – eroded by years of conflict – fragmented and lacking coordination while the statistical infrastructure is missing 
thus jeopardizing Somalia’s aspiration for full debt relief if not addressed. It is therefore urgent for Somalia to invest in 
 
1 IMF, Somalia to Receive Debt Relief under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative. Press Release NO. 20/104, March 25, 2020. 
2 In March 2020, Somalia qualified for the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative Decision Point, thereby clearing 
arrears to International Financial Institutions (IFIs) and reducing the debt-to-gross domestic product (GDP) ratio from 113 
percent 
in 2018 to 70 percent in 2020. This milestone reopens access to regular concessional resources from IDA and other IFIs, 
together with investment of private capital from the International Finance Corporation (IFC). 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 79  
     
 
rebuilding the NSS. A strong and well-coordinated statistical system will be better placed to generate the basic statistics 
necessary for policymaking that will support conditions for inclusive growth and poverty reduction. 
5. 
A sustainable and reliable statistical system is also needed to support the understanding of the current 
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis and inform its post-crisis recovery and growth. An outbreak of COVID-19 caused 
by the 2019 novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) has been spreading rapidly across the world since December 2019. In mid-
March 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared a global pandemic as the virus rapidly spread across the 
world and had resulted in over 100,000 cases and over 5,000 deaths across 139 countries. As of June 8, 2020, there were 
2,368 confirmed cases of COVID-19 in Somalia.3 However, the virus that causes COVID-19 appears to be highly 
contagious, suggesting Somalia may continue to report an increase in cases. COVID-19 is expected to have significant 
health, social and economic impacts at the household and business levels and for the overall economy that will further 
exacerbate poverty and vulnerability in the country. Having an efficient statistical system, infrastructure and capacity in 
place to generate reliable data to monitor the wellbeing of households and firms will offer a wealth of information to 
policymakers and decisionmakers for effective long-term planning and capacity for policy responses based on evidence, 
especially within an economy that is susceptible to multiple shocks. 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
6. 
To promote an evidence-based approach to policy- and decision-making, a strengthened NSS is required. This 
needs to be complemented by improved links of data from NSS to the national planning, monitoring and evaluation and 
project and program implementation. For instance, statistics that are produced and disseminated by the Directorate of 
National Statistics (DNS) are crucial inputs for the National Planning Department and the Monitoring and Evaluation 
Directorate (MED) within the Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Development (MoPIED) to plan, monitor 
and evaluate public programs (Error! Reference source not found.). Quality statistics are also essential for agencies 
responsible for financial and economic management to support policy and decision-making. Three areas of deficiencies 
constrain these institutions’ core functions: (1) low capacity of the NSS to produce, disseminate and enhance the use of 
statistics; (2) weak links between the statistical system and policy- and decision-making processes; (3) insufficient 
capacity to generate the evidence needed to inform the policy and budgeting processes. 
7. 
Years of civil war and ongoing conflict in parts of the country have considerably eroded the Somali statistical 
system, infrastructure, and capacity leading to gaps in statistical information that is vital for national development. 
After the fall of the Government in 1991, much of the statistical infrastructure and information was lost. Over the years, 
the Somali statistical authorities continued to collect some economic and financial data through some surveys, although 
with minimum capacity and scope. Despite re-establishing a federal government in 2012 and making effort to reestablish 
some statistical foundations and services, Somalia is still far from a functioning NSS needed to produce official statistics. 
The FGS is aware of these weaknesses and has enacted a new Statistics Act. The new Act received the President’s assent 
in February 2020. When operationalized, the new Statistics Act will strengthen the existing mandate of the DNS, leading 
to the establishment of a Somali National Bureau of Statistics with the necessary authority for the collection, processing 
and dissemination of official statistics as well as the coordination of official statistics activities undertaken within the 
NSS. It will also allow the inclusion of statistics information from new actors, such as the private sector and non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), into the NSS. 
8. 
The existing NSS is weak, fragmented and lacks coordination institutionally and technically, creating a difficult 
context to produce statistics. The institutions currently responsible for the production of official statistics are nascent, 
 
3 Somalia Covid19. Somali Government twitter handle (https://twitter.com/somaliacovid19?lang=en). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 79  
     
 
under-resourced and under-performing. DNS, the apex of the system, has limited capacity and resources to coordinate 
the NSS and provide technical support to statistics units in the line ministries, departments and public agencies (MDAs). 
Some Federal Member States (FMSs) do not have well-established statistical units to contribute to the wider NSS. 
Coordination structures and tools are limited or non-existent. Institutions producing statistics often fail to adhere to 
international standards, to collect and process the data, or to supply collected information to be used more broadly. 
Deprivation in data coverage, quality, and accessibility to inform policy are also among the weaknesses of the statistical 
system. 
Figure 1. Organization for Statistics and Economic Planning 
 
Note: The blue boxes represent government departments/units. Green boxes represent new units. 
White boxes represent functions. The solid lines denote a reporting relationship. The dotted lines 
denote flow of information. 
 
9. 
 The current status of Information and Communications Technology (ICT) infrastructure in the DNS, line 
ministries, departments and public agencies in the FGS and statistical departments in the FMS is beset by lack of 
adequate hardware (servers, desktops, laptops, etc.), software licenses for basic productivity tools (Microsoft Office), 
and for statistical software. Aside from this, the DNS at present does not have a physical space with basic facilities to 
house its servers, such as air-conditioning and uninterruptible power supply (UPS), as well as, hardware/software for 
network connectivity. Email service within the DNS and between MDAs and with FMSs for the most part is based on 
private email services used by staff, due to the fact that the official email does not work reliably. 
Council of Ministers
Ministry of Planning, 
Investment and Economic 
Development (MoPIED)
National Planning 
Department
National Monitoring and 
Evaluation Directorate
Directorate of National 
Statistics
Statistical Departments of 
Federal Member States
Line Ministries
National Economic Council
Analysis 
Planning 
Monitoring 
Data production 
Survey data 
production 
Admin. Data 
production 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 79  
     
 
10. 
The weak statistical capacity is reflected through the low score in the World Bank’s Statistical Capacity Indicator 
(SCI).4 In 2017, Somalia ranked the lowest among all countries in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) with an overall score of 30, 
which is far below the SSA average of 62 (Figure 2).5 This score is below the average performance along the three 
dimensions of the indicator, i.e. collection (source data), availability (periodicity and timeliness), and practice 
(methodology). Somalia scored 20 out of 100 points on both the source data and methodology, below the 56 and 49-
point average for SSA respectively. The weakness of methodology is due to the country’s limited adherence to 
internationally recommended standards, methods and data reporting practices in social and macroeconomic statistics. 
The weakness of source data is, among others, due to outdated population and agricultural censuses, limited poverty-
related surveys and limited data from administrative systems. Against this backdrop, Somalia has important gaps to fill 
in many areas of statistics.  
Figure 2. Statistical Capacity Indicator 
Source: World Bank, 2018. Note: ECA – Eastern Europe and Central Asia; LAC – Latin America and the Caribbean; MNA – Middle East and 
North Africa; SAS – South Asia; SSA – Sub-Saharan Africa. 
11. 
The production of national accounts statistics is hampered by a myriad of challenges such as weak coordination 
among data producers, lack of statistical data and infrastructure and inadequate human resources. National accounts 
are mainly limited because the source data and methodology underpinning the estimates are weak. The DNS relies on 
the expenditure approach to compile estimates of GDP. It does not compile production-based estimates of GDP. Further, 
even the only available estimates of GDP are based on imperfect and scarce source data combined with weak 
assumptions. These estimates are heavily based on only one household consumption survey conducted in 2017 and 
proxy estimates are often used to fill data gaps.6 Since one data point is used to generate the GDP series, GDP is driven 
by changes in factors other than consumption, which is unrealistic. These shortfalls provide an incomplete and unreliable 
 
4 SCI is a composite score assessing the capacity of a country’s statistical system. It is an average score based on three 
categories (methodology, source data, and periodicity) on a scale of 0 to 100. Information on the 25 indicators covering 
these areas are derived either from publicly available information and/or country input.  
5 World Bank 2018 Country Statistical Information Database. 
6 Current expenditure-based GDP estimates for Somalia are based on Wave 2 of the Somali High Frequency Survey 
conducted in 2017. Household surveys providing information on consumption and poverty are conducted infrequently. The 
last nationally representative household surveys providing information on household income, consumption and poverty 
were conducted in 1985. 
15.0
25.0
35.0
45.0
55.0
65.0
75.0
85.0
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017*
Somalia
SSA
MNA
EAP
SAS
LAC
ECA
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 79  
     
 
picture of the economy. The compilation of the production-based estimates of GDP is constrained because there is no 
comprehensive and up-to-date statistical data and infrastructure—such as a business register of establishments to 
provide a sampling frame for the economic surveys, statistical sources (household, agriculture, establishment and price 
surveys, and administrative data), statistical classification. Limitations in the administrative data sources in terms of 
sectoral and geographic coverage, scope, indicators, timing of collection, and inconsistency of definitions undermine 
their suitability for national accounts compilation. For instance, there is currently no structured compilation of 
agricultural statistics and existing records are limited in scope, coverage and quality. Records from the Revenue 
Authority (excise duty and value-added tax (VAT)) are either incomplete or missing. Information from the Central Bank, 
Ministry of Finance and umbrella bodies are not systematically available. In addition, MDAs generally do not apply 
international standards and methodology (classification) for the collection and compilation of data. Therefore, the 
available data are inconsistent and unreliable. Staff constraints have also made the compilation of national accounts 
statistics very difficult. The Somali statistical authorities only recently began the compilation of GDP. With little or no 
prior experience and formal training in national accounts, the DNS needs assistance in designing an appropriate national 
accounts compilation framework as well as in identifying suitable data sources and deflators, as a start for the 
compilation of GDP. 
12. 
Somalia has no nationally-representative consumer price index (CPI). This impedes the ability of decision-makers 
to track inflation, which is a key economic indicator for all countries and is widely used in determining the purchasing 
power, for taking monetary policy actions, and generally for its impact in decision-making especially on investment and 
consumption. The accuracy of statistics that incorporate price statistics, including poverty statistics and macroeconomic 
statistics (such as real GDP), are also undermined. The current challenges to producing a CPI for Somalia include 
incomplete geographical coverage of price data collection, lags between collection, processing and dissemination, lack 
of an up-to-date CPI basket and weighting of the commodities in the basket, limited know-how of price data compilation, 
especially among statistical departments in some of the FMSs. 
13. 
Household surveys of adequate representativeness to support the monitoring of monetary and non-monetary 
dimensions of poverty are few. Although the Somaliland Household Survey (SLHS) and Somali High Frequency Survey 
(SHFS) provided much needed indicators including poverty estimates, they had some limitations. The SLHS conducted 
in 2013 did not cover Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and nomads. The first wave of the SHFS conducted in 2016 
excluded large areas of Somalia that were insecure areas as well as nomads which resulted in the sample representing 
40 percent of the Somali population. The second wave of the SHFS (2017) improved on representativeness, expanding 
geographic and population coverage to include additional areas, IDP settlements and nomads, but weaknesses remained 
and need to be addressed to produce more accurate and comprehensive figures on poverty. In addition, since 2015, the 
World Bank has committed to supporting low income countries to conduct at least one household survey every 3–5 
years, thus there is need to continue improving the availability of household level data. Further, there is need to create 
a sustainable means of tracking poverty and other key indicators, which would require building the capacity of the Somali 
statistical authorities to plan, design, implement and process surveys. SHFS was conducted and processed by a private 
firm with support from the World Bank and the NSO. SHFS also employed an innovative questionnaire design but 
requires relatively complex estimation methods for consumption.  
14. 
There is also lack of relevant gender data and statistics which hinders the country’s effort to track progress on 
gender inequality over time and design policies to address it. Somalia faces tremendous gender inequality. The United 
Nations Development Programme’s (UNDP) Gender Inequality Index places Somalia as the fourth most unequal country 
in the world in terms of gender. Gender statistics must reflect the many areas where women and men may not enjoy 
the same opportunities. For example, the gap in employment between men and women is substantial (20 percentage 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 79  
     
 
points).7 Moreover, the maternal mortality rates are among the highest in the word, at 829 per 100,000 births in 2017.8 
To help guide countries produce gender statistics, the minimum set of gender indicators was prepared by the Inter-
Agency and Expert Group on Gender Statistics . However, gender statistics produced by Somalia’s Directorate of National 
Statistics fall short of this recommendation due to data gaps. As a result of these gaps, the country cannot produce some 
key gender statistics such as sex-disaggregated agricultural land ownership and firm ownership and management. In 
order to address this gender data gap, there is need to support the statistical system to produce (through improved 
establishment and household survey) and disseminate more gender statistics, specifically the indicators listed under the 
minimum list. An improved statistics system used for informing policymaking would have benefits to women in access 
to basic services, finance, public health, and other services. 
15. 
Emerging challenges require a modern and adaptive approach to data collection, but there is currently no data 
collection system in place to respond quickly to new and more immediate data needs for policy. Although an essential 
output of the statistical system, traditional surveys require significant amounts of time for preparation and are less agile 
to quickly respond to new data needs. The 2017–2018 drought and more recent floods highlighted the need to be able 
to respond quickly to shocks and disasters. Insecurity in part of the country also continue to hinder data collection 
requiring less conspicuous methods of data collection. Somali policy makers are operating in a volatile context with very 
limited data, thus a frequent and rapid monitoring system that can provide almost real-time data even in emergency 
situations is important to support timely policy responses. Timely and reliable data can support effective allocation of 
resources at federal state and local levels, and proper design, implementation, and evaluation of public programs. 
16. 
Somalia has taken steps to improve the statistical system in the last five years, and awareness of the importance 
of quality statistical data for policymaking and progress monitoring is growing. The period 2014–2016 was marked by 
reforms to the legislative and regulatory frameworks for statistics aimed at improving the organizational structure and 
operation of what can be considered as a well-functioning NSS. Steps to improve the human and logistical capacities 
were also taken. In 2018, the Somali National Strategy for the Development of Statistics (NSDS) was designed, providing 
a strategic vision for the development of statistics in Somalia.9 Furthermore, some statistical infrastructure and policies 
for dissemination of statistical data were developed. New household-based surveys were implemented, in addition to 
the 2017 SHFS—providing updated socioeconomic statistics—like the 2014 Population Estimation Survey (PESS), and 
the 2018 Somali Health and Demographic Survey. The proposed project, fully in line with the objectives of the NSDS, will 
support the ongoing institutional reform process and aims to sustain the ongoing efforts. 
17. 
The ability of the Monitoring and Evaluation Directorate (MED) within the FGS Ministry of Planning, Investment 
and Economic Development to fulfill its core functions remains constrained by lack of human resource capacity, 
quality data and appropriate ICT tools. At present, MED has prepared a national monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
policy; developed a rudimentary IT M&E platform and toolkit used for the collection and analysis of M&E data from 
MDAs and FMSs. However, MED faces substantial challenges which hinder its role of monitoring and evaluating 
implementation progress of public projects, programs and policies outlined in NDP9. There is a lack of professional M&E 
staff to assist in designing and implementing M&E activities for public projects and programs. There is also lack of a 
national M&E institutional framework to ensure that all programmatic activities performed by government and other 
key stakeholders are monitored. To address these challenges, MED’s staff needs to be trained to acquire M&E skills. 
 
7 Pape, Utz Johann; Karamba, R. Wendy. 2019. Somali Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment: Findings from Wave 2 of the 
Somali High Frequency Survey (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group. 
8 World Development Indicators. 2017. 
9 NSDS have been instrumental to help countries improve their legal framework with new statistical laws in line with UNs’ 
fundamental principles of Official statistics. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 79  
     
 
There is also a need to develop better indicators and targets at the program level, as well as get quality administrative 
data from the NSS that feed into those indicators. From the reporting perspective, annual implementation progress 
reports of main public programs and projects need to be made available for staff responsible for the implementation of 
various activities included in NDP9. 
18. 
FGS agencies responsible for economic and financial management have limited analytical capacity to meet their 
stated objectives. The newly established National Economic Council (NEC) aims to strengthen policy formulation and 
implementation in line with the country’s economic agenda to promote inclusive and sustained economic recovery.10 
The NEC has a technical arm—comprising of National Economic Advisors (NEA) and Economic Policy Analysis Unit 
(EPAU)—which supports the delivery of its mandate through undertaking evaluations and evidence-based research and 
analysis to inform economic policy formulation and reforms. However, this technical arm is yet to be fully equipped with 
adequate capacity to successfully support the Council in delivery of its objectives. In addition, the FGS departments 
responsible for macroeconomics and fiscal planning and monitoring have limited technical capacity for carrying out 
macroeconomic-fiscal programming, budget preparation and implementation. 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
 
19. 
Access to quality data and statistics is essential for the design, management and monitoring of government 
development strategies, policies and programs. Capacitated Statistics and M&E directorates are critical for the 
Government to track the implementation of public projects and programs outlined in its NDP9 and to improve evidence-
based policy and decision-making. Such dedicated programs are crucial to reduce poverty and lower vulnerability. 
Therefore, by strengthening the national capacity to produce and disseminate better statistics, the proposed project 
will help support improved evidence-based decision making and foster good governance, which will in turn improve 
development outcomes mindful of poverty reduction and improvement of standards of living. 
20. 
Furthermore, these data, complemented by better macroeconomic statistics, are necessary inputs to build a 
knowledge base and conduct economic analysis to inform the design of government policies as well as for the 
monitoring of macro-fiscal management in the country. It also addresses stakeholders’ demand for statistics, which are 
currently unsatisfied. The need for more available and comprehensible statistical information on poverty, as well as 
accurate and timely data on national accounts and CPI are recurrent demands from both national and international 
users of statistics, including the Government, private sector, civil society, academics, and development partners.  
21. 
This project is well aligned with the current NSDS. In addition to covering the NSO, it caters for improvements in 
the whole NSS. The NSDS guided the project design in sequencing of operations and selecting the organizational, data 
collection and processing matters which allows for tangible results to be achieved in the short time span. Inclusion of 
the data utilization, planning and policy components will demonstrate that NSDS is implementable if the resources and 
the Government desire come together. 
22. 
The project is addressing the information gaps identified in the 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) 
(Report No. 123807-SO) and meeting the objectives of the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 
for Somalia for FY 2019–22 (Report No. 124734-SO). The SCD identified the paucity of quantitative data upon which to 
 
10 The NEC is chaired by the President of the FGS with the Prime Minister as alternate. Its membership comprises of the 
Presidents of the Federal Member States (FMS), the economic sub-committee of the FGS Cabinet, and the Governor of the 
Central Bank of Somalia. The NEC has a technical arm which includes NEA comprising of five Somali and four international 
experts, and Economic Policy Analysis Unit (EPAU).  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 79  
     
 
monitor poverty, socioeconomic indicators, and evaluate macroeconomic development as a constraint to effectively 
monitoring development. CPF Focus Area 1 aims at strengthening institutions to deliver services and identified statistics 
and economic planning as a proposed operation. The project aims to strengthen the capacity of the institutions 
responsible for the production of official statistics. 
23. 
The project supports the World Bank Group’s commitment to fill data gaps for monitoring the Twin Goals and 
the Sustainable Development Goals, as well as to support the poorest nations to produce a household-level survey 
every 3–5 years.11 The data collected and curated through the project will be essential inputs for future World Bank 
interventions, country policy dialogue, and country-level diagnostics. The collection of objective and quantitative data 
from Household Surveys to inform policies aimed to help the poor supports poverty fighting efforts.  
24. 
The project addresses gender data gaps, which are noted in the World Bank Group Gender Strategy for the period 
FY16–FY23. This Project Appraisal Document articulates a logical chain from analysis (the country’s lack of gender 
disaggregated data and capacity to produce them), to actions (the data collection supported by this project, especially 
the household survey and integrated business establishment survey will help produce sex-disaggregated data related to 
education, employment, firm/land ownership to fill such gender data gaps). Finally, the Results Framework will track 
the number of gender statistics as per the minimum set of gender indicators. In addition to making gender-relevant data 
available to other World Bank supported interventions, the project will ensure that the analysis to be carried under the 
project is disaggregated by sex.  
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 
A. Project Development Objective 
PDO Statement 
 
25. 
The objective of the project is to strengthen the national statistical system in the collection, processing and 
dissemination of poverty and selected macro-economic data to inform development policy and poverty reduction 
activities 
26. 
Strengthening the national statistical system will be achieved through (i) support in the implementation of the 
legal and institutional reforms proposed in the recently enacted Statistics Act; (ii) provision of trainings and 
equipment to key producers of official statistics, and (iii) support to production of key statistical products. When 
operationalized, the new Act will provide a strong legal and institutional framework for effective development of the 
national statistical system. One important change contained in the new law is transforming the DNS into a more 
autonomous Somali National Bureau of Statistics (SNBS) to be managed by an independent management board within 
the framework of the NSS. The new law will also foster the statistical coordination. The SNBS is being given a mandate 
for coordination and supervision of the entire NSS. Within this framework, SNBS, as a semi-autonomous body, shall be 
the main government agency responsible for the development and management of official statistical information in the 
NSS. To improve inter-agency coordination, data collection, data sharing and dissemination, SNBS and MED will establish 
coordination mechanisms that will ensure that producers and users of official statistics and M&E reports meet regularly 
 
11 The 78 poorest countries are those with IDA or Blend (i.e. IDA/IBRD) lending status that are eligible for World Bank grants 
and concessional financing, inclusive of India. The list is available at: http://ida.worldbank.org/about/borrowing-countries. 
Although Somalia does not have IDA lending status, it may be on the verge of initiating a debt relief process through the 
HIPC Initiative. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 79  
     
 
to discuss M&E and data management needs, planned M&E and data collection activities, standardization of concepts, 
definitions, classifications and methodology, and data management, analysis and dissemination. A training and 
equipment needs assessment for MDAs that are expected to benefit from this project will be undertaken during the first 
year of the project implementation. Results of the study will be used to develop a stock of IT equipment and an 
integrated training plan needed to strengthen these project-benefiting MDAs during project implementation. Once this 
exercise is successfully completed, integrated training plans will be compiled and presented to the relevant government 
authorities and its key development partners (including the World Bank) for consideration and possible funding. 
27. 
Priority data gaps to fill include poverty statistics, revision of the CPI and national accounts. In this regard, the 
project will assist key selected federal-level MDAs to improve and expand the production of administrative data, 
especially the key datasets needed for the national accounts’ compilation. Usually, MDAs maintain or develop their 
administrative databases principally for their own administrative requirements or as part of their regulatory functions 
and, the data may not directly meet the national accounts requirements. Therefore, staff in the National Statistics Office 
responsible for compilation of national accounts are always required to prepare necessary transition accounts and tables 
and incorporate standard adjustments to meet national accounts requirements. This project will provide training to the 
national accounts’ staff to prepare the transitional accounts and other statistical tables for translating micro-data or 
consolidated data from administrative sources to national accounts. The project will also support carrying out a Somali 
Integrated Business Establishment Survey (SIBES) as well a Somali integrated Household Budget Survey (SIHBS). The 
results of these two surveys will also be fundamental for the design and compilation of a national CPI basket and the 
weighting of the commodities in the basket. 
28. 
The improvement of capacity in planning and economic policy analysis will be achieved through support to the 
MED, the NEC, and macroeconomic and fiscal programming. The main aim is to enhance capacity in fiscal and 
macroeconomic analysis, economic forecasts, research as well as in monitoring and evaluation. The project will support 
training of staff of macro fiscal department of the Ministry of Finance on how to develop a sound macro-fiscal framework 
to be used as a key policy tool for the government’s annual budget preparation. The framework will provide the context 
under which fiscal targets will be set, policy choices determined, and realistic revenue and expenditure projections are 
prepared. The project will also support NEC to produce well-researched and reasoned policy documents needed to 
inform the government policy- and decision-makers in the allocation of the country’s scarce resources. Thus, the 
documents produced by staff under this program will assist government policy makers to make realistic and achievable 
decisions during the preparation and implementation of poverty reduction and economic growth programs. A sub-
component of this project will provide training and support for MED staff to be able to develop capacities and efficiencies 
in the monitoring of the government’s poverty reduction and economic growth programs. 
PDO Level Indicators 
 
29. 
The key aspects of the project development objective (PDO) are the strengthening of the Somali statistical 
system, the filling of data gaps in key areas, and improvement of capacity in planning and economic policy analysis. 
Progress towards the PDO will be monitored through the following indicators:  
i. 
Percentage of users satisfied with statistical products and services of the DNS (as measured by the 
Somali User Satisfaction Survey). 
ii. 
Number of statistical products supported by the project designed and implemented in line with 
international standards and available for open access. 
iii. 
Number of policy studies produced, published, and disseminated by NEC. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 79  
     
 
iv. 
Number of Annual Budget Outlook Reports and Annual Budget Policy Statements produced by the 
MOF and disseminated 
v. 
Medium-term Economic and Fiscal Framework produced by MOF. 
vi. 
Number of M&E annual progress reports to monitor the implementation of growth and poverty 
reduction projects and programs outlined in NDP9. 
 
B. Project Components 
 
30. 
The project has four components: (1) Strengthening coordination, statistical infrastructure and data development 
of the national statistical system, (2) ICT development and equipment of the national statistical system, (3) Data 
utilization for M&E and planning, and (4) Project management.  
31. 
Integrated approach: Given the capacity constraints faced by the Government, an integrated approach that 
combines strengthening governance and capacity building of the national statistics system, economic policy analysis, 
budgeting and M&E system is adopted to reduce transaction costs and, at the same time, to maximize synergy between 
the three areas. The approach explicitly supports greater transparency and encourages the use of new methods and 
technologies to increase the reliability and accessibility of statistics needed for economic analysis and monitoring 
projects, programs and policies.  
32. 
Project focus, complementarity and coordination: This project will support: (i) key time-sensitive activities of FGS 
to fill critical gaps in data and economic policy analysis/planning relating to the formulation and implementation of 
policies, projects and programs that boost economic growth, and improve the lives of poor in the country; and (ii) 
activities to initiate longer-term (phased) capacity building programs. The proposed project complements ongoing 
Technical Assistance (TA) provided by the IMF, Statistics Sweden, United Nations (UN) agencies, and other development 
partners. 
Component 1: Strengthening coordination, statistical infrastructure and data development of the 
national statistical system (US$14.08 million equivalent) 
 
33. 
The aim for this component is to provide support to the client’s key official statistics producing agencies in 
strengthening the capacity of the country’s NSS to collect data for poverty and macroeconomic monitoring (national 
accounts/GDP/sector growth, inflation, key administrative data). It will also support the review and improvement of 
existing institutional frameworks so that the interaction and dialogue between DNS and statistical units in MDAs are 
institutionalized and streamlined, thereby increasing efficiency of the system. Developing protocols so that the DNS can 
compile and effectively disseminate the necessary official statistics from the administrative sources along with the 
results of statistical surveys it undertakes.  
34. 
The component will address the key findings of the NSDS’s assessment relating to the NSS’s need to build 
capacity to produce quality and timely statistics as well as the need to strengthen DNS’s legal and organizational 
structure.12 It will assist in the implementation of the legal changes outlined in the new Statistics Act. Thus, this 
component’s activities are aimed at providing statistical capacity building to the DNS and statistics units in key MDAs 
through specific trainings, learning by doing processes, as well as improving the producer-producer coordination, 
cooperation, information sharing, as well as strengthening the dialogue between official statistics producers and the 
 
12 The National Statistical Development Strategy (NSDS) 2018/19- 2022/23 was recently completed and identified gaps in 
two streams of data work including survey data collection and administrative data collection. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 79  
     
 
users of these statistics. The component will further support the transformation of the DNS into its new role as the apex 
organization for managing the NSS consisting of MDAs’ and FMSs’ departments responsible for producing official 
statistics and users of these statistics, including development partners financing official statistics. 
35. 
Activities to be supported under this component include (a) Coordination of the National Statistics System, (b) 
Design and Implementation of the Somali Integrated Household Budget Survey, (c) Production of Business and key 
Administrative Data for the Compilation of National Accounts, (d) Strengthening human capacity in Poverty, CPI and 
National Accounts statistics, and (e) Development of a Compendium of statistical concepts and definitions, data access 
and information dissemination policy. 
36. 
Through this component, the project will also enable the production of data and statistics relevant for informing 
the post COVID-19 crisis recovery and growth. The two key surveys (SIHBS and SIBES) to be funded under the project 
will include questions relating to how COVID-19 pandemic impacted households and business establishments. The survey 
results will assist FGS to formulate appropriate policy and make informed decisions regarding the social and economic 
recovery programs for the period after the pandemic. The poverty diagnostics coming from the household survey will 
give FGS an understanding of the impact of COVID-19 on the levels of poverty in the country for various demographic 
groups. The project will also improve the CPI indices, allowing for FGS to better monitor the movements in prices 
following the crisis. The project will also improve the quality, availability and reliability of survey and administrative data 
used for the compilation of national accounts aggregates and national poverty indicators. This project will therefore 
improve the reliability of statistics in sectors most impacted by the COVID-19 crisis including the public health, education, 
agriculture, labor, and external trade. 
37. 
The project will also enable the production and use of sex-disaggregated and other relevant data to address 
critical gender gaps in Somalia. Through the undertaking of a household budget survey and integrated business 
establishment survey, data related to education, employment, firm/land ownership will be generated in a sex-
disaggregated manner. Currently, there is limited data available related to female participation in firm/farm 
ownership/management and employment. Relevant data generated and made available on the DNS microdata library 
will directly support informed decision-making on gender policies and programs and track progress along certain 
indicators of gender equality which is key to effective implementation of government programs related to gender 
equality. 
38. 
Furthermore, the project will ensure that relevant capacity building activities include gender considerations (for 
example, including special considerations for qualified female candidates in the learning programs and in the hiring of 
female enumerators for surveys activities to promote gender balance and better responses from female interviewees). 
The project will also train DNS staff on how to lower gender bias in responses by training staff on gender-sensitive 
questions. The project will also train DNS staff to analyze and present data on gender-related issues, with the aim of 
increasing availability, accessibility and usage of gender-desegregated data.  
39. 
The project will incorporate gender in its monitoring and evaluation framework to monitor and report gender 
results. Appropriate indicators will be used to meaningfully track and report gender results. For instance, final survey 
results, including gender-disaggregated data and a set of indicators, will be produced and disseminated in a user-friendly 
way ready to inform policies and programs to narrow gender gaps. The project will track the share of DNS staff receiving 
trainings and the share of female enumerators recruited.  
40. 
Special attention to the sustainability of the reliable statistical life cycle and institutional capacity will be given 
in the implementation of this component. It is not enough to fill data gaps and improve the quality of statistics during 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 79  
     
 
the implementation of this project but also to build capacity in the DNS and statistics units in MDAs so that monitoring 
of poverty, macroeconomic, and other socio-economic indicators will be done in a sustainable manner. Also, this 
component will be carried out in close collaboration with other development partners. Statistics Sweden has agreed to 
work with the project team in supporting some of the key activities relating to SIHBS and CPI compilation. To avoid 
duplicated efforts and expedite the process, the team will continue to make efforts to engage other development 
partners including the IMF.  
Sub-component 1.1. Supporting the Development and Coordination of the NSS (US$1 million equivalent) 
41. 
This sub-component will support the strengthening of the recipient’s legal and organizational framework for 
the NSS as well as statistical infrastructure. The activities will include: (i) support to the transformation of the DNS to 
a semi-autonomous Bureau of Statistics; (ii) improving the governance and accountability of producers of official 
statistics; (iii) facilitating producer-producer cooperation to encourage production and sharing of key administrative 
data; (iv) strengthening dialogue between official statistics producers and users of these statistics through establishing 
the relevant forums and working groups and developing policies, protocols and memoranda for collaboration. The new 
Statistics Act mentioned in paragraph 7 will require technical assistance to draft regulations, and to set a new era of the 
statistical coordination among producers and users of statistics. Furthermore, based on the envisioned statute of the 
SNBS, the project will support the assessment of human resources needs to fulfill the new organigram and mandate of 
the Bureau. More specifically, it will include, among others, the institutional structure of the Bureau and the appropriate 
staffing needs and skill set, budget, and salary levels. 
 
42. 
Reliable administrative data are of the utmost importance to sector policy monitoring and decision making. As 
a first step to achieve this objective, DNS will select key MDAs at federal level responsible for production of social and 
economic statistics needed for compiling the national accounts aggregates and national poverty indicators. These MDAs 
include FGS ministries responsible for education, health, agriculture, public finance, external trade, commerce, industry, 
labor, public works, reconstruction and housing, water and energy, transportation and civil aviation, seaports and 
marine transportation, post and telecommunications as well as the Central Bank of Somalia. The sub-component will 
focus on assessing the availability and quality of existing administrative data in these MDAs and develop a plan for 
improvement.  
43. 
The coordination of these key MDAs will also be enhanced with the establishment of a coordination mechanism 
and continuous dialogue between the DNS and the respective administrative source data agencies. And if necessary, 
this coordination will be enhanced through memoranda of understanding clearly establishing frequency, data format 
and data transfer, responsibilities, ways of collection, and data sharing. Various coordination structures have been 
described in the NSDS, including the formation of technical working groups (tasks team or committees) to facilitate 
coordination and harmonization and sharing data issues. 
Sub-component 1.2. Somali Integrated Household Budget Survey (US$6 million equivalent) 
 
44. 
The proposed sub-component will support the design and implementation of the Somali Integrated Household 
Budget Survey (SIHBS) for monitoring welfare, providing macroeconomic baselines and establishing a baseline survey 
for a frequent data collection system. The primary objective of the SIHBS is to collect detailed information on household 
expenditures and consumption incurred on goods and services to monitor household welfare and measure poverty. In 
addition to welfare data, SIHBS will collect other socio-economic information relevant for monitoring the living 
conditions of private Somali households such as access to basic assets, facilities and services. Data collected through the 
SIHBS will also be used to improve the GDP estimates and for the compilation of the commodity basket and commodity 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 79  
     
 
weightings used in the construction of a new CPI. Furthermore, the survey will serve as baseline for a rapid monitoring 
system. 
45. 
The SIHBS will be designed and implemented taking into consideration i) the key objectives of the survey, and 
ii) the constraints of operating in a complex and insecure environment such as Somalia’s. To that end, to collect as 
much relevant information as possible, with a certain degree of accuracy, and without jeopardizing the safety of the 
enumerators, the design of the survey instrument will prioritize the crucial modules needed to measure poverty and key 
priority living standard indicators. Urgently needed data to complete other household-based economic activities needed 
for compilation of national accounts will also be added. In this regard, in addition to the consumption module, it is 
expected that the questionnaire includes an agricultural module, and a household establishment module. The results 
from these modules will be essential to support the estimation of poverty, inequality, as well as for the compilation of 
national accounts and CPI. The data collection approach for collecting consumption data will be using a full consumption 
module capturing data based on a seven days’ recall approach. The integration of the agriculture module, to gather 
information on agricultural production of household units—which is currently lacking for Somalia—is of critical 
importance in national accounts (production-based GDP) especially in countries where agriculture is household-based 
as in Somalia. Due to limited financial resources and DNS capacity, it is thought more appropriate to include an 
agricultural module in SIHBS instead of carrying out a separate agriculture survey. The inclusion of the household-based 
establishment module, to gather information on non-agricultural household-based production—which again is lacking 
for Somalia—is also of critical importance in national accounts, since economic activities are largely informal and this 
module will help capture most of these activities. The questionnaire and survey methods will be reviewed and modified 
to address gender data gaps in relevant areas like education, employment, business ownership. 
46. 
During the implementation of the SIHBS survey, special focus will be devoted to ensuring full coordination 
between the FGS and FMSs- from the sampling to the analysis- as well as to addressing comparability issues with the 
SHFS (2017) that may arise from the changes in the sampling frame, questionnaire design and timing of the survey. 
Special attention will also be made to gather the telephone numbers of respondents to allow for interview follow-ups. 
If needed, a complementary survey in markets will be implemented to address the issue of nonstandard local units. 
After the survey, sampling of some SIHBS households is needed for multiple follow-ups on select questions for a brief 
period to support the monitoring of poverty and living standards. Since the frequent monitoring system would be based 
on SIHBS, there is need for an agreement with the National Statistics Office to assure confidentiality in the use of 
information shared from SIHBS. 
47. 
The SIHBS will build on lessons learned from previous statistical operations conducted in the country and will 
follow international best practices to yield quality data. As such, the SIHBS will make use of an updated sampling frame 
created from satellite image that will include rural, urban, nomadic and IDP populations. The sample will be designed to 
produce statistics representative of accessible rural and urban areas in Galmudug, Hirshabelle, Jubbaland, Puntland, 
Somaliland, and South West as well as urban areas in Banadir. The sample will also feature nomads and IDP households 
located in the above geographic areas. To ensure quality throughout the lifecycle of the survey, the methodology and 
design of the survey will incorporate international best practices and lessons learned through the Living Standard 
Measurement Survey program and employ technological innovations (see Annex 8 on Data Quality). The Technical 
Review Panel, which is under the auspices of the Household Survey Working Group at the World Bank, will also be 
consulted to review the survey plan and instrument prior to fieldwork. A combination of Computer-Aided Personal 
Interviewing (CAPI) and Real-time Data Monitoring (RTDM) tools will be used to reduce errors during data collection and 
during data compilation. Moreover, to improve access to data for a wide range of beneficiaries, efforts will be made to 
disseminate the electronic microdata of the survey within 12 months of the completion of the survey. The data will be 
disseminated online on the DNS microdata library and World Bank microdata library.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 79  
     
 
48. 
The component will also fund data collection, analysis and dissemination of SHIBS results. The funds under this 
component will provide training to enumerators and field supervisors and funding for the necessary field statistical 
infrastructure (e.g. sampling frame, field survey equipment). Three hands-on training phases (training of trainers, 
training of data entry and CAPI personnel, and training of data collection and analysis personnel) will be undertaken 
prior to fieldwork. The trainees will acquire in-depth knowledge of all the data collection instruments and manuals. The 
acquired skills will enable them to participate in the field data collection and compilation. 
Sub-component 1.3. Strengthening Sources of Business and Administrative Data needed for the Compilation of 
National Accounts and Key Social Statistics (US$4.5 million equivalent)  
 
49. 
The main objective of this sub-component is to address key data gaps needed to produce quality national 
accounts statistics that meet the basics of the System of National Accounts 2008 (SNA2008) and other international 
statistical standards. The specific goal is to enable the production of estimates based on the production approach and 
make available additional and better-quality data sources for the expenditure approach estimates as well. The 
government’s high and immediate priority is constructing production/supply-side national accounts (i.e. value-added by 
industry). Production statistics are essential for the analysis of sources of economic growth that informs the NDP and 
other national planning documents. Addressing key data gaps needed to produce production-based GDP estimates, 
mainstreaming economic statistics in relevant government bodies, and strengthening human and physical capital will 
be instrumental to the improvement of the SNA. To mainstream economic statistics, the sub-component will finance 
activities to support the coordination with relevant MDAs as well as to establish standards and methods to harmonize 
the collection of data and compilation of statistics. Skills development on economic statistics and data analysis, including 
training for DNS and FMS staff, as well as the provision of the computers and IT systems are also needed. 
50. 
In addition, compilation frameworks and production processes for macroeconomic data will be developed in close 
consultation with IMF during the implementation of this sub-component. The development of a nationally-
representative Consumer Price Index to monitor inflation and carry out of an integrated household budget survey to 
collect more comprehensive household consumption data and other socio-economic indicators, and establish a baseline 
for a frequent monitoring system to track key socio-economic indicators are important complement for improvement 
of national accounts quality. 
Design and Implementation of Somali Integrated Business Establishment Survey 
51. 
Business statistics are key for the use of the production approach in national accounts statistics. In this regard, 
the project will support the design and implementation of the Somali Integrated Business Establishment Surveys (SIBES) 
to complement administrative data sources to produce high quality national accounts and provide inputs vital to the 
formulation of government economic policy and the monitoring of performance against development goals, as well as 
provide information for the expansion of the business sector. These surveys will be conducted over a full set of economic 
units in major urban centers, including all establishments undertaking some legal activity in Somalia. 
52. 
The SIBES will be undertaken in two phases. The first phase aims to obtain a statistical business register (SBR), 
compiled through a most comprehensible possible business listing. The SBR will form the sampling frame from which 
establishments will be selected for the second phase. Thus, the first phase will involve detailed listing of all businesses 
in the selected urban centers. The second phase will go beyond the basics and gather data with a higher level of 
granularity on the operations of the business establishments. The project will support the collection of sex-
disaggregated data on ownership and employment from IBES. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 79  
     
 
53. 
At its completion, SIBES is expected to i) provide the main inputs for compilation of an SBR in Somalia that meets 
the needs of policy makers, other private sector users, and researchers; ii) furnish information on the economic activity 
of all establishments operating in main urban centers in Somalia, their size and spatial distribution; iii) furnish detailed 
information on the operations and on value added processes within all the production sectors in the Somalia economy, 
and iv) obtain data on production and employment as a basis for government and business analysis and decision-making 
among other important outcomes.  
Strengthening Administrative Data 
54. 
This sub-component also aims to improve administrative data sources for national accounts, will specifically 
encompass a comprehensive set of activities aimed at bringing the Somali System of National Accounts (SNA) up to 
international standards, namely 1) developing, standardizing and harmonizing data collection tools for administrative 
data for national accounts, 2) developing the guidelines for collecting, compiling and processing administrative records, 
3) training the key data producers to use the developed tools and to adhere to the guidelines, 4) developing a reporting 
system, and 5) providing training to staff in key data producers to collect data required for SNA compilation. The DNS 
will work closely with respective counterparts to develop these tools and guidelines and to train key data producers to 
use the tools and to adhere to guidelines. Agricultural statistics are critical to supply-side GDP. As part of the NSDS, the 
Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) of the FGS developed a sector statistics plan which highlights the mentioned-above steps 
1 and 2 as a priority action for the Ministry which will be implemented during project implementation.  
Sub-component 1.4. Strengthening Human Capacity in Poverty, CPI and National Accounts Statistics (US$2.5 
million equivalent)  
 
55. 
This activity will support the training of staff to compile poverty indicators and indexes as well as to draw 
poverty lines, using new data from the poverty survey and new CPI. This activity will also support the expansion of 
skills and expertise of professional staff involved in SNA compilation through further training and development on 
economic statistics and their linkage to SNA. This will include continuous training in national accounts, benchmarking 
and study tours, tailor courses on economic statistics, and data analysis. For instance, the project will finance training 
for NSO staff responsible for compilation of the national accounts to prepare “bridge tables” or “intermediate tables” 
for translating micro-data or consolidated data from administrative sources to national accounts indicators with the 
objective of improving the usability of administrative data. Translation of administrative data to national accounts 
becomes easier if the administrative data (especially in the case of government and business accounts) follows agreed 
national or international standards and classifications, as most international standards are largely harmonized with 
national accounting principles. Additionally, an in-house Technical Advisor in DNS will provide technical assistance.  
56. 
Further, the sub-component will contribute to the improvement of human resources’ capacity for the 
production of a national Somali CPI using a basket of commodities and weights compiled from SIHBS to be financed. 
Collection of consumer price data is critical for inflation measurement. The CPI is the benchmark for inflation and price 
changes guide for any economy, which affects the real purchasing power of consumers’ welfare. Inflation also has an 
impact on many businesses and investing decisions. An accurate measure of inflation is key to decision-makers in 
formulating their plans. 
57. 
Currently prices of goods and services are systematically collected only in Mogadishu, Puntland and Somaliland, 
but the data collections are not comparable, and, therefore, requires harmonization of methods and tools for CPI 
compilation. Compiling a new commodity basket and commodity weighting, increasing the coverage of price data 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 79  
     
 
collection and harmonizing the existing data will improve reliability and usefulness of CPI.13 To address the limited quality 
and coverage of price data, Statistics Sweden will provide funds to the Somali statistical authorities so that enumerators 
can purchase consumer goods in the market and record transaction prices in urban centers of Banadir, Somaliland, 
Puntland, Galmudug, Hirshabelle, South West, and Jubbaland. This project will therefore be complementing the 
Statistics Sweden support. In addition, enumerators will be trained to carefully inspect the specification of products to 
ensure all prices are collected from the same outlets and same specification of products. 
58. 
This project will strengthen the coordination of consumer price data collection and strengthen the skills of the 
responsible staff to compile CPI. Staff skills and expertise will be expanded through training and development on CPI. 
This activity will also support the hiring of a consumer price expert in DNS to coordinate the collection, consolidate the 
price data for analysis, and train staff to compile CPI. The expert will also provide needed technical assistance to the 
DNS to transition toward using the new weights that will be made available from the SIHBS, as well as for the compilation 
of an aggregate national CPI. 
Sub-component 1.5. Development of a Compendium of Statistical Concepts and Definitions, Data Access and 
Information Dissemination Policy (US$0.08 million equivalent)  
 
59. 
The project will support improvement in data management and dissemination practices to strengthen statistical 
confidentiality and microdata sharing. In Somalia, most of statistics is being produced with very low dissemination 
strategy in place. Therefore, it is important to develop dissemination policy for all statistical information. This will enable 
the researchers and other users to make use of the available data and statistical information for further research and 
decision making. In addition, the project will assist the national statistics authority with the development and 
implementation of the Accelerated Data Program (ADP), which facilitates the archiving and documentation of micro 
datasets, and eventually providing users with online access to anonymized microdata. For surveys, the project will 
ensure that metadata reports are prepared and made available. Through ADP, the national statistics authorities will be 
assisted to develop their National Data Archive (NADA) for statistical censuses and surveys undertaken in Somalia. This 
system will serve as a portal for researchers to browse, search, and download relevant census or survey documents and 
metadata. The project will also support a statistical training program that aims to build minimum capacity for data 
management across the MDAs benefitting from the project. Activities also include development of a Compendium of 
Main Concepts, Definitions and Classifications to be promoted across the NSS to support production of harmonized data. 
Component 2: ICT Development and Equipment of the National Statistical System (US$0.92 million 
equivalent) 
 
60. 
This component supports the ICT infrastructure in the DNS (headquarters, and field offices), and selected key 
federal level MDAs mentioned in Component 1 above. This component will provide computers, laptops and related IT 
networking equipment. The infrastructure and equipment provided will improve the administrative data compilation 
and dissemination process, and enhance information access to the public and make best use of information technology 
channels and storage systems. IT equipment will be provided to DNS, and statistics units in the selected key federal 
MDAs mentioned above. 
Sub-component 2.1. ICT Needs Assessment and ICT Strategy (US$0.2 million equivalent)  
 
13 Previously, price data from the Market Price Survey (MPS), an independent price survey from the above price data 
collections, was used for spatial price adjustment in poverty measurement. But, MPS includes fewer number of goods and 
services items than those used in a typical compilation of CPI. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 79  
     
 
 
61. 
During the development of NSDS, an ICT capacity gap was identified as a major weakness in virtually all statistics 
units in key MDAs in Somalia. To close this gap, the project will support an ICT needs assessment to identify the 
hardware/software needed to support the production and dissemination of the social and macroeconomics statistics 
needed for the compilation of national accounts, CPI and poverty indicators. 
62. 
DNS rightly recognizes the importance of using ICT in statistical activities and would like to undertake an ICT 
needs assessment to develop and implement an ICT strategy that will ensure statistical data transparency and expand 
data availability to the users of official statistics. The main objective of developing the ICT strategic plan is to improve 
information technology environment across the NSS. DNS expects to get the following results from effective 
implementation of the proposed ICT strategy: (i) improved statistical data quality, (ii) reduced data collection and 
processing time; (iii) use of a standard software packages for statistical data analysis; (iv) a central integrated statistical 
database for data dissemination; (v) extension of DNS data network to statistics units in the selected federal MDAs. 
Sub-component 2.2. Statistical Software and Hardware (US$0.72 million equivalent) 
 
63. 
This activity will finance the acquisition of information technology and communications infrastructure, primarily 
computer hardware and software, networks, internet, databases, and other equipment needed to collect, process and 
disseminate statistical data for DNS, field offices and selected MDAs. Attention will be paid to improving the IT 
infrastructure and ensuring their maintenance. The infrastructure and equipment will enhance information access to 
the public and make best use of information technology channels and storage systems. IT will be mainstreamed in all 
the activities of the project benefiting MDAs. 
64. 
The strategy in sub-component 2.1 is expected to include ICT related items taking into account: (1) High speed 
connectivity over the internet; (2) data storage for survey and administrative data, as well as for other aggregated and 
processed data; (3) Data and network protection (security) from unauthorized access; (4) LAN connectivity for individual 
offices including printers/scanner/fax and other productivity tools; (5) customized software (where necessary) for data 
cleaning validation, aggregation (creation of macro-indicators) and for data maintenance. 
Component 3. Data Utilization for M&E and Planning (US$6.5 million equivalent)  
Sub-component 3.1. Strengthening MED Capacity (US$1.8 million equivalent) 
 
65. 
This sub-component will strengthen the capacity of MED to monitor the implementation of public projects and 
programs of NDP9, particularly those under Pillar 3 and 4. The programming tools, indicators, and targets at the 
program level should be improved. The quality of administrative data that feed those indicators and targets also need 
to be improved. Such improvement is a joint work of MED, Planning Directorate and the DNS. It is important to mention 
that FGS has two levels for the monitoring public projects/programs: one level–which is monitored at the Office of Prime 
Minister (OPM)–is related to monitoring very specific public interventions (referred to as priorities) based on the 
President’s agenda; and the other level–which is monitored by MED–is related to monitoring the list of projects funded 
mainly by development partners and public investment projects and expenditures, which are registered in the Aid 
Information and Management System (AIMS). 
66. 
Activities under this sub-component will specifically have a focus on: (i) Development and Implementation of a 
National M&E Framework; (ii) Design and Implementation of Sectoral Performance Monitoring Pilots; (iii) M&E Capacity 
Building, and (v) Enhancements to the M&E System Platform. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 79  
     
 
67. 
Better coordination for M&E among MDAs and developments partners is needed. The integrated training plan 
will include training for MED staff involved in the development of social and macro-economic indicators used for the 
monitoring of NDP9 priority projects and programs. The MED, through the MoPIED high-ranking authorities, will be 
encouraged to work with other MDAs to establish a mechanism for coordination and harmonization of M&E activities 
at sectoral and national levels. Strong coordination with development partners is also required to avoid duplication and 
the development of M&E islands in different sectors or programs. There are existing coordination mechanisms such as 
the National Development Committee and the Pillar Working Group 3 sub-group on Statistics, M&E and Planning to 
support coordination among MDAs and development partners. 
Sub-component 3.1.1. Development and Implementation of a National M&E Framework (US$0.3 million 
equivalent) 
 
68. 
MED intends to develop a comprehensive M&E framework document that will guide the monitoring and 
evaluation of the government’s performance in implementing policies, programs and projects included in NDP9. The 
basic purpose of developing an M&E framework is to provide a feedback mechanism on the effectiveness of 
implementation of the policies and programs set out in the NDP9, MDAs and FMSs' Strategic Plans and Annual Work 
Plans. The last M&E Framework was developed by MED in 2017. It was created to track the implementation of policies, 
programs and projects implemented during the last NDP period, which ended in December 2019. The proposed 
framework aim is to develop a strong feedback mechanism that will regularly provide FGS and FMS’s residents with 
good quality and timely M&E information regarding implementation progress of priority projects and programs included 
in NDP9. 
69. 
The framework will be undertaken through a consultative process of all the stakeholders involved in monitoring 
the country’s economic and social sectors. MED intends to engage an experienced consultant to assist in the 
development of the framework. The project will provide support to the hiring of the consultant, preparation, publication 
and dissemination of the framework document. 
Sub-component 3.1.2. Sectoral Performance Monitoring Pilots (US$0.8 million equivalent) 
 
70. 
Producing regular performance reports of public programs and projects is required to provide feedback about 
the implementation progress of selected poverty and vulnerability reduction programs and projects under NDP9. 
M&E reporting is essential for FGS because it is used to: (a) determine the extent to which NDP9 and other MDAs plans 
are on track and to make corrections accordingly; (b) make informed decisions regarding operations, management and 
service delivery; (c) ensure the most effective and efficient use of resources; (d) evaluate the extent to which priority 
programs/projects in NDP9 are having the desired impact; and (e) whether new information has emerged that requires 
a strengthening and/or modification to individual project management plan. 
71. 
The NDP9 envisages that the national M&E system will be built around a periodic reporting system based on 
indicators at the output and outcome levels. To achieve this objective, the project will concentrate efforts in i) 
improvements to the M&E toolkit, ii) developing a dashboard for enhanced monitoring capabilities, and ii) providing 
specialized training to relevant stakeholders. Most of NDP9’s interventions will focus on reaching the most 
disadvantaged and vulnerable social groups. As such, the project will ensure that M&E reports include monitoring 
gendered targets and indicators, where data is available. 
72. 
Sectoral pilot programs will be developed and linked to the M&E toolkit at MED to enable M&E staff to produce 
sectoral monitoring reports using real and improved data, indicators and targets. The development of these pilot 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 79  
     
 
programs will also include revising indicators matrices; assessing the quality of indicators and targets, and improving 
statistical data related to the selected targets and indicators. The M&E reports will also be used to review and adjust, if 
needed, government budget programs (Results based Budgeting). Additionally, a basic dashboard to compare efficacy, 
efficiency, and quality of public programs and policies by pillars and sectors under the NDP9 will be developed.  
Sub-component 3.1.3. M&E Capacity Building (US$0.5 million equivalent) 
 
73. 
A tailor-made M&E training for MED staff members, and M&E units in MDAs is needed to standardize the M&E 
practice across MDAs and improve the quality of the reporting. Although every line ministry has an M&E function 
performed through specific M&E departments or inside planning units, these MDAs are not sharing the same M&E tools 
and standards and there is only basic equipment and limited technical staff in these units.  
74. 
The project will provide training that specifically addresses the shortcomings mentioned above. The targeted 
training will be designed based on the results of the M&E framework (Sub-component 3.1.1) and the lessons learned 
from the sectoral performance monitoring pilots (Sub-component 3.1.2) and will build on the support that other 
development partners are already providing to some MDAs on this front.  
Sub-component 3.1.4 Enhancements to the M&E System Platform (US$0.2 million equivalent) 
75. 
The IT M&E platform at MED requires urgent enhancements to adequately leverage the public programs' 
performance reporting system. The M&E IT platform has several modules including the line ministries' annual work 
plans and their milestones; outcome indicators at an institutional level, and for some relevant programs, a basic 
reporting system but some updates are required to produce accurate data that will be used in the feedback loops. 
76. 
This activity will adjust the conceptual design of the national M&E system platform, design and develop new 
modules to include information from beneficiaries, service delivery, budget information and sectoral data, as well as to 
improve the reporting system. 
Sub-component 3.2 Supporting Economic Policy Analysis and Planning Capacity (US$4.7 million equivalent) 
 
77. 
This sub-component seeks to support the FGS authorities in developing economic policies, rebuilding 
institutions of economic management, and enhancing institutional capacity necessary for policy formulation and 
implementation. The component aims to promote evidence-based planning and strengthen core government 
institutions and functions for enhanced service delivery, economic growth, and poverty reduction. The sub-component 
activities will constitute: (i) Supporting NEC and EPAU operations; (ii) providing training on macroeconomic-fiscal 
analysis, forecasting and reporting, particularly in the macroeconomics and revenue departments in FGS. 
Sub-component 3.2.1. Supporting the Operations of National Economic Council (NEC) (US$4 million equivalent) 
 
78. 
The FGS established and launched the NEC in August 2018. The NEC is chaired by the President of the FGS, and 
the Prime Minister as alternate with members comprising the Presidents of FMSs, the economic sub-committee of 
Cabinet of the FGS, the Governor of the Central Bank of Somalia, and nine experts in economics, governance and related 
fields. The nine experts comprising of five Somali Nationals and four internationals constitute the members of the NEA 
mandated to support the NEC in conducting evidence-based research on economic, governance and related issues of 
concern to the nation. An Economic Policy Analysis Unit (EPAU) was also established which forms the technical arm and 
Secretariat of the NEC. The NEA and the EPAU form the technical arm of the NEC and supports the Council to deliver on 
its mandate and responsibilities. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 79  
     
 
79. 
The objectives of NEC and its components include the setting of domestic and international economic policies, 
ensuring that policy decisions and programs are consistent with the national economic agenda set out in the NDP9, and 
monitoring the implementation of sound policies and plans to promote inclusive and sustainable economic growth. The 
Council’s initial focus is on strategies to accelerate recovery of domestic production; formulate and manage the 
country’s economic reforms for recovery, sustainable and accelerated economic growth and poverty reduction - through 
realistic and achievable strategies and sound policies; evidence-based research to inform the authorities on structural 
reforms in the domestic economy as well strategies to address recurrent shocks; and facilitating cooperation and 
collaboration to promote good economic and financial governance. 
80. 
The NEA, as a branch of NEC, has been created to implement research and economic analysis. NEA’s roles include 
conducting and implementing research and analytical work in specific themes; drafting advisory policy papers for the 
attention of the government outlining the policy arena, analyzing the developments and options and proposing possible 
avenues of action; providing in-person advice in debate and discussion platforms as well as formal and informal meetings 
with senior government leadership, and; participating on specific request of the Government in national and 
international events that are relevant to the economic development of Somalia.  
81. 
The NEA is established to strengthen economic policy formulation, analysis and promote reforms. To execute 
its mandate and responsibilities, this project sub-component seeks to support the Council and its technical arm to deliver 
on their mandate in key selected areas, particularly two areas which the CPF identified as Focus Areas: (a) Strengthening 
Institutions to Deliver Services, and (b) Restoring Economic Resilience and Opportunities.14 The sub-component targets 
the following activities: 
a. Policy Research and Studies: This activity will involve evidence-based economic research studies and 
analysis conducted by NEA on selected issues (relevant to NDP9 and the World Bank’s CPF) of high priority 
that will drive national objectives of economic recovery and development. The following major 
workstreams have been prioritized by the NEA: (i) Inclusive economic growth and transformation; (ii) 
Fiscal federalism revenue mobilization and related issues (iii) Financial sector developments and access to 
finance; (iv) Regional Cooperation to include increased integration for macro-economic, trade and 
investment development; (v) Private sector development, and; (vi) Productive sectors promotion for 
growth and employment generation.15  
b. Policy Forums: The activity constitutes bi-annual national policy forums and NEC meetings to take stock 
of pertinent issues critical for the recovery of the Somali economy (relevant to NDP9 and the CPF) and its 
development in the medium and long term.16 The NEC meetings bring together, members of the National 
Economic Council and advisory. Additionally, economic policy forums which highlights topical issues of 
national interest and concern and brings together government officials, private sector, civil society, 
academia, and international development partners will be undertaken. The financing of these forums will 
be limited to the research outputs of NEA and issues of relevance to the CPF. 
 
14 The Somali CPF’s two focus areas aim to deliver four strategic objectives linked directly to the top binding constraints on 
poverty reduction and shared prosperity, namely improving public finance management and institutional effectiveness; 
enhancing domestic revenue mobilization and resource sharing; establishing basic delivery systems for more inclusive social 
services, and; building the capacity of Somali municipalities for urban resilience. 
15  NEA has a wider work agenda, but the Project will limit itself to what is supporting the WBG CPF. 
16 The project will only finance Policy Forums on issues which comes out from research and studies financed under (a) 
above.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 79  
     
 
c. Publications and Dissemination: This activity will support the NEC in the publication and dissemination of 
the research policy studies and strategies. Wider dissemination will be carried out during NEC’s 
consultative meetings and/or economic policy forums as well as other relevant forums and online 
platforms. The NEA and EPAU (technical arm of NEC) will establish partnership across the country, within 
the region and globally for knowledge sharing and learning. Establishing networks with local and 
international Economic Councils, institutions and think tanks will promote improved capacity and delivery. 
Other country experiences, especially those transitioning from post-conflict situations, are avenues for 
learning.  
d. Policy Advisory: This activity aims at providing advice to the government on strategic policies and reforms 
aimed at promoting economic growth and transformation, enhanced service delivery and poverty 
reduction. The NEC team will deliver evidence-based and timely advice to underpin the economic and 
social reforms needed to attain national recovery and prosperity and assist with institutionalizing open 
dialogue with all partners in the dissemination and promotion of government policies, including the 
research output, policy briefings, communication outreach and publications.  
e. Core administrative and operating costs: This activity will cover the operations of the NEC secretariat 
titled as the EPAU that is critical for the delivery of the outputs expected from NEC. This will cater for the 
administrative staff and operational costs for the Council’s office. The secretariat will be responsible for 
organizing the meetings and events of the council and will ensure appropriate financial and administrative 
handling of the NEC operations. They will also ensure the publication of documents and promoting policy 
materials to the general public, supports the wider engagement of the various stakeholders in the work 
of the NEC and equally ensures that the NEC serves as an effective (physical and digital) platform for 
knowledge dissemination and dialogue. The costs are expected to cater for program support and 
operational costs (office supplies and equipment including computers, printers, utilities, internet & other 
communication costs, and related equipment).  
3.2.2. Supporting Macroeconomic and Fiscal Programming (US$0.7 million equivalent) 
 
82. 
This activity seeks to build capacity in fiscal, economic and planning departments of Ministry of Finance (MoF), 
MoPIED and the Central Bank of Somalia (CBS) to improve analytical capacity in producing budget related documents 
and analysis that will link annual budgets with priority activities identified in the NDP9. Currently, there is no linkage 
between annual budgets and the NDP9. The implementation of this sub-component will result in improved budget 
preparation and implementation and will link the available resources with the priority projects and programs identified 
in NDP9. The sub-component will also include development of the Medium term Economic and Fiscal Framework. It 
further aims to build capacity of economic and planning departments to produce annual budget outlook papers and 
annual budget policy statement papers to improve budget formulation and to strengthen macro-fiscal analysis, 
monitoring and forecasting within the macroeconomics and revenue departments in the FGS. The capacity 
enhancement will be carried out through providing the staff in these Units with the computers/laptops and relevant 
software, and the necessary skills-set to formulate, implement and monitor macroeconomic, fiscal and financial policies; 
to analyze, monitor and evaluate bilateral and multilateral economic and financial relations; and promote transparency 
and accountability on the use of public resources. The sub-component will focus on developing the local capacity in the 
following key areas: (i) overall performance of Somalia economic sectors and expected economic outlook (i.e. analysis 
and production of reports of data relating to GDP, inflation/CPI, monetary and fiscal policies, balance of payments, and 
debt); (ii) revenue and expenditure analysis, reporting, and forecasting, and (iii) Analysis of private sector development 
(private investment, business climate, and infrastructure development).  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 79  
     
 
Component 4. Project Management (US$3.5 million equivalent) 
 
83. 
This component will provide support to the Recipient to strengthen its capacity for project planning and 
budgeting, management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation activities, all through the provision of technical 
advisory services, training, operating costs and the acquisition of goods. 
84. 
However, the cost of doing business in the country is high compared to other countries in Africa and this 
component will feature some substantive activities related to development of institutional capacity to implement 
projects of this scope and nature. DNS (and then the SNBS) will form a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) drawing its 
members from external consultants and government seconded staff. In terms of administration, the PIU will be reported 
to the DNS director. In this regard, the PIU will be reinforced with short and extended-term consultants in areas of need. 
These specialists will help ensure compliance with procurement, disbursement and financial management policies and 
procedures, as well as train relevant staff in PIU on fiduciary practices and project management related issues. 
85. 
Careful sequencing and complementarity of project activities is essential for project success. The priority is to 
establish a solid foundation for project management including strengthening the necessary management and fiduciary 
functions in the PIU, establishing coordination and oversight bodies, and instituting an annual cycle of planning, 
implementation and reporting with an accompanying suite of annual plans and annual and quarterly financial and 
progress reports. To facilitate and guide day-to day operations, a Project Operations Manual (POM) will be developed 
and adopted prior to project effectiveness.  
86. 
Project Preparation Advance: The World Bank has provided US$ 1.77 million to finance the following preparatory 
project activities: (a) establishment of a Project Management Unit, including hiring of key PIU staff, training for PIU staff, 
purchase of office and transport equipment and operating costs; (b) preparatory activities for Component 1, including 
preparatory work for SIHBS, review of DNS organizational structure and development of change strategy; (c) preparatory 
activities for Component 2 including preparing MDAs training needs assessment and ICT needs assessments for the NSS, 
and (d) activities for Component 3 including support to MED and NEC on selected priority activities. 
Table 1. Project Components and Costs 
Project Component 
Estimated Budget 
 
 
  
COMPONENT 1: STRENGTHENING COORDINATION, STATISTICAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND DATA 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE NATIONAL STATISTICAL SYSTEM 
14,080,000 
1.1 
Supporting the Development and Coordination of NSS 
1,000,000 
1.2 
Somali Integrated Household Budget Survey 
6,000,000 
1.3 
Strengthening Sources of Business and Administrative Data needed for 
Compilation of National Accounts and Key Social Statistics 
4,500,000 
1.4 
Strengthening Human Capacity in Poverty, CPI and National Accounts Statistics 
2,500,000 
1.5 
Development of a Compendium statistical concepts and definitions, Data Access 
and Information Dissemination Policy 
80,000 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 79  
     
 
COMPONENT 2: ICT DEVELOPMENT AND EQUIPMENT OF THE NATIONAL STATISTICAL SYSTEM 
920,000 
2.1 
ICT Needs Assessment and ICT strategy 
200,000 
2.2 
Statistical Software and Hardware 
720,000 
COMPONENT 3: DATA UTILIZATION FOR M&E AND PLANNING 
6,500,000 
3.1 
Strengthening MED Capacity 
1,800,000 
 
3.1.1. Development and Implementation of a National M&E Framework 
300,000 
 
3.1.2 Sectoral Performance Monitoring Pilots of MED 
800,000 
 
3.1.3 M&E Capacity Building  
500,000 
 
3.1.4 Enhancements to the M&E System Platform  
200,000 
3.2 
Supporting Economic Policy Analysis and Planning Capacity 
4,700,000 
 
3.2.1 Supporting the Operations of NEC 
4,000,000 
 
3.2.2 Strengthening Macroeconomic and Fiscal Programming 
700,000 
COMPONENT 4: PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
3,500,000 
 
TOTAL 
 
Project Preparation Advance 
 
25,000,000 
 
1,766,000 
 
 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
 
87. 
The direct beneficiaries of the project will be the producers of official statistics, decision- and policymakers in 
public ministries and agencies as well as those engaged in M&E of public projects and programs. These beneficiaries 
will provide inputs to deliver the outputs (quality statistics, M&E indicators, economics analysis) needed by the 
Governments to inform and underpin planning and decision-making processes; monitor performance; and evaluate the 
impact of public projects and programs. MED and the Planning Directorate in MoPIED, DNS and statistics units will 
benefit from core reforms of investments in skills and equipment, training and technical assistance and financial support 
for statistical operations with the aim of building the capacity in those institutions. Other beneficiaries of the project will 
be data users in the public and private sector, the civil society which needs statistical information and economic analysis 
for advocacy and holding governments to account, academia for research and teaching purposes, the development 
partners and multilateral organizations to assess requirements for assistance and/or participation in development 
initiatives; and the public at large for a variety of purposes. Interested and engaged citizens will also benefit from better 
access to information. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 79  
     
 
88. 
The project is intended to benefit the Somali people who are the target beneficiaries of the rebuilding of the 
economy to open jobs and opportunities, eradicate poverty and improve their living conditions, especially in the 
context of COVID-19 recovery plan.  
D. Results Chain 
 
89. 
The results chain make explicit what changes comes out of this project interventions. This chain of causes and 
effects, distinguishing between interventions (activities and outputs of the three components) and results to attain 
(outcomes and PDO). The figure below, shows the main issues and challenges to be tackled with the project, as well as 
main outputs and outcomes organized by component.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 79  
     
 
Figure 3: Theory of Change for the Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building Project (SISEPCBP) 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 79  
     
 
 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
 
90. 
Somalia is a country affected by fragility, conflict and violence (FCV) that has endured decades of conflict with 
limited financial resources and international support. The conflict has damaged not only the physical infrastructure like 
roads, school and health facilities but also the statistical infrastructure with equipment, statistical records and human 
resources destroyed. As a result, even basic statistical information is lacking, and the amount of resources needed to 
rebuild the national statistical system is so huge that the support from many development partners is crucial to help 
revive the statistical system. In this regard, as one of the leading agencies supporting the statistical capacity building in 
developing countries, the Bank involvement is needed to support the ongoing process to rebuild the capacity of the 
Somali National statistics offices and for production of a minimum set of data crucial to inform the rebuilding of the 
economy. The Bank’s engagement in Somalia also needs a minimum set of information to inform the decision making.  
91. 
Coordination with the development partners involved in statistical capacity building has been key in delivering 
technical assistance to FGS. The team has been in close contact with the IMF and Statistics Sweden on the support the 
project is expected to provide on CPI, the Somali SIHBS and the national accounts. The IMF has been providing technical 
assistance on national accounts and has coordinated closely with the World Bank in recent years, by sharing the results 
from their recent work in Somalia. Future collaboration and coordination is planned with Statistics Sweden on the SIHBS 
and CPI and anticipated with IMF on CPI and national accounts. Coordination and collaboration of support will be 
facilitated through the Joint Government and Development Partner Forum. 
92. 
Statistics Sweden is one of the big providers of support in Somalia on statistical capacity building. Indeed, 
following the implementation of its first support to its cooperation project (November 2015 – August 2019) with the 
Somali Statistical Authorities, Statistics Sweden is preparing to start a second phase of its support covering a period from 
January 2020 to December 2022. Activities to be supported include technical assistance and financial support for data 
collection for production of the CPI and GDP calculations from the expenditure side as well as from the production side, 
and to start building a statistical Business register. The project expects also to support the implementation of the 
Household Budget Survey, improvement of capacity to store and process data and data dissemination and use.  
93. 
There are many areas of common support between the current Bank project and the second phase of Statistics 
Sweden support. Therefore, there will be a very close coordination with Statistics Sweden to create synergies and avoid 
duplication of activities. One option that could be explored is the preparation of a unique budget with sharing of costs 
scheme for activities benefiting from both supports.  
94. 
Operationalizing the World Bank Group Gender Strategy requires a data-driven approach. The WBG Gender 
Strategy document for FY16-23 calls for improved country-level diagnostics on gender gaps in SCDs and CPFs, to 
“highlight how closing the key gender gaps in endowments, economic opportunities, and voice and agency would boost 
the attainment of the twin goals.” Improving the quality of country-level and regional-level data are essential. 
95. 
The project supports IDA’s gender commitment along all three dimensions, including the analysis of gender gaps, 
the design of actions to address those gaps, and the M&E of progress. Gender equality is key to accelerating poverty 
reduction and economic and social development as pointed out in the SCD and NDP9. In the country, large gender gaps 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somali Integrated Statistics and Economic Planning Capacity Building (P171160) 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 79  
     
 
persist across education, health, economic participation and voice and agency according to several sources.17 18 19 For 
instance, the ratio of female to male labor force participation rate was 0.25 in 2018, maternal mortality is among the 
highest worldwide at 829 deaths per 100,000 live births (2017), and male rates of school enrollment, literacy and 
attainment significantly exceed female rates.20 In order to more effectively address those and related gender issues 
through targeted policies and programs and to monitor progress, there is a need for gender relevant data across 
different dimensions. Thus, where applicable, the surveys and administrative data collection activities supported by the 
project should be designed in a way that will enable compilation and analysis of the data disaggregated by sex through 
individual‐level data commonly recorded in censuses and surveys. Activities supporting the monitoring of NDP9 
interventions will include gen