 
 
 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
Report No: PAD3788  
 
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT 
ON A 
PROPOSED GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 27.9 MILLION 
(US$40.0 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
 
FOR A 
 
SOMALIA EDUCATION FOR HUMAN CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
 
May 24, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Education Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
 
 
 
  
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective April 30, 2021) 
 
Currency Unit =  US$ 
SDR 0.69638368 = US$1 
US$1.43599 = SDR 1 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Hafez M. H. Ghanem 
Country Director: Keith E. Hansen 
Regional Director: Amit Dar 
Practice Manager: Muna Salih Meky 
Task Team Leader: Huma Ali Waheed  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
ABE 
Alternate Basic Education 
BCR 
Benefit-Cost Ratio 
CBA 
Cost Benefit Analysis 
CEC 
Community Education Committee 
COVAX 
COVID-19 Vaccines Global Access 
COVID-19 
Coronavirus Disease 2019 
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework 
DG 
Director General 
DP 
Development Partner 
E&S 
Environment and Social 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
EGRA 
Early Grade Reading Assessment 
EGMA 
Early Grade Math Assessment 
EMIS 
Education Management Information Systems 
ESCP 
Environment and Social Commitment Plan 
ESF 
Environmental and Social Framework 
ESS 
Environmental and Social Standards 
ESMF 
Environment and Social Management Framework 
ESSP 
Education Sector Strategic Plan 
EU 
European Union 
FCDO 
United Kingdom’s Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office 
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict and Violence 
FGM 
Female Genital Mutilation 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FIU 
Federal Member State Implementation Unit 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMS 
Federal Member State 
GBV 
Gender Based Violence 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEC 
Girls' Education Challenge 
GEMS 
Geo-Enabled Initiative for Monitoring and Supervision 
GER 
Gross Enrollment Rate 
GIIP 
Good International Industry Practice 
GPE 
Global Partnership for Education 
GRM 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
ICT 
Information and Communications Technology 
IDP 
Internally Displaced Persons 
IFR 
Interim Financial Reports 
INGO 
International Nongovernment Organization 
IPF 
Investment Project Financing 
IQS 
Integrated Quranic School 
IRR 
Internal Rate of Return 
LMP 
Labor Management Procedures 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluations 
 
 
 
MoECHE 
Ministry of Education, Culture and Higher Education 
MoU 
Memorandum of Understanding 
NDP 
National Development Plan 
NGO 
Non-Governmental Organization 
NPF 
New Procurement Framework 
NSIP 
Nonstate Schools Incentive Program 
OHSE 
Occupational, Health, Safety and Environmental 
PFM 
Public Financial Management 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PMC 
Program Management Committee 
PMU 
Project Management Unit 
PP 
Procurement Plan 
PPA 
Public Procurement, Concessions and Disposal Act 
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development 
POM 
Project Operations Manual 
PSC 
Project Steering Committee 
RCRF 
Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing  
RPF 
Resettlement Policy Framework 
SEAH 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Harassment 
SEP 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
SGBV 
Sexual and Gender-Based Violence 
SHDS 
Somalia Health and Demographic Survey 
SIG 
School Improvement Grant 
SMP 
Security Management Plan 
SNHCP 
Shock Responsive Safety Nets for Human Capital Project 
SNPE 
Somaliland National Policy of Education 
SNU 
Somali National University 
SOMGEP 
Somali Girl’s Education Promotion Project 
SoE 
Statement of Expenditures 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
SWEDD 
Sahel Women’s Empowerment and Demographic Dividends 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
TPDP 
Teacher Professional Development Program 
TPT 
Teacher Proficiency Testing 
ToR 
Terms of Reference 
TPT 
Teacher Proficiency Test 
UCS 
Use of Country Systems 
UN 
United Nations 
UNESCO 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
UNICEF 
United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund 
USAID 
United States Agency for International Development 
WASH 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
WBG 
World Bank Group 
WFP 
World Food Program 
 
 
 
     
Page 1 of 104 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... 2 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 9 
A. 
Country Context ............................................................................................................................ 9 
B. 
Sector Context ............................................................................................................................. 10 
C. 
Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ......................................................................................... 21 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 21 
A. 
Project Development Objective .................................................................................................. 21 
B. 
Project Components ................................................................................................................... 22 
C. 
Project Beneficiaries ................................................................................................................... 30 
D. 
Results Chain ............................................................................................................................... 31 
B. 
Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design ................................................................ 33 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................ 34 
A. 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ....................................................................... 34 
B. 
Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements ..................................................................... 35 
C. 
Sustainability ............................................................................................................................... 36 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 37 
A. 
Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis................................................................................ 37 
B. 
Fiduciary ...................................................................................................................................... 40 
C. 
Legal Operational Policies ........................................................................................................... 43 
D. 
Environmental and Social ........................................................................................................... 43 
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES ..................................................................................... 45 
VI. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 46 
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 49 
ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan............................................... 58 
ANNEX 2: Nonstate Education Providers in Somalia ............................................................ 75 
ANNEX 3: Description of Component 2 - Expansion of Access to Quality Schooling for 
Disadvantaged Children ......................................................................................................... 77 
ANNEX 4: Environment and Social Safeguards Instruments ................................................ 84 
ANNEX 5: Climate and Disaster Screening and Climate Co-Benefits ................................... 88 
ANNEX 6: World Bank Group COVID-19 Country Program Response .................................. 92 
ANNEX 7: Addressing GBV through project interventions ................................................. 102 
 
 
 
 
     
Page 2 of 104 
 
     
DATASHEET 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 
 BASIC INFO TABLE 
Country(ies) 
Project Name 
Somalia 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
P172434 
Investment Project 
Financing 
High 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component  (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict  
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[✓] Hands-on Enhanced Implementation Support (HEIS) 
 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
16-Jun-2021 
30-Jun-2026 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
No 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
Increase access to primary education in underserved areas, with a focus on girls, and improve quality of instruction. 
 
Components 
 
Component Name  
Cost (US$, millions) 
 
System building  
   5.00 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 104  
     
 
Expansion of access to quality schooling for the disadvantaged  
  22.00 
 
Enhanced instruction quality  
  10.00 
 
Project management  
   3.00 
 
 
Organizations 
 
Borrower:  
 Ministry of Finance  
Implementing Agency: 
 Ministry of Education, Culture and Higher Education  
 FMS Ministries of Education  
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
Total Project Cost 
43.00 
Total Financing 
43.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
40.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILS-NewFinEnh1 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
40.00 
          IDA Grant 
40.00 
Non-World Bank Group Financing 
     Counterpart Funding 
3.00 
          Borrower/Recipient 
3.00 
 
  
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Guarantee Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
   0.00 
  40.00 
   0.00 
  40.00 
National PBA 
   0.00 
  40.00 
   0.00 
  40.00 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 104  
     
 
Total 
   0.00 
  40.00 
   0.00 
  40.00 
 
 
 
Expected Disbursements (in US$, Millions) 
 
WB Fiscal Year   
 
 
 
 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Annual 
 
 
 
 
   1.92 
   6.73 
   9.48 
   9.45 
   7.41 
   5.02 
Cumulative 
 
 
 
 
   1.92 
   8.65 
  18.12 
  27.58 
  34.98 
  40.00 
  
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Education 
 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
⚫ Substantial 
2. Macroeconomic 
⚫ Substantial 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ Moderate 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ Moderate 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
⚫ Substantial 
6. Fiduciary 
⚫ Substantial 
7. Environment and Social 
⚫ High 
8. Stakeholders 
⚫ Moderate 
9. Other 
 
10. Overall 
⚫ Substantial 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 104  
     
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?  
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
  
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
  
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
Legal Covenants 
  
 Sections and Description 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 104  
     
 
Schedule 2, Section I.A.1(a) of the Financing Agreement: the Recipient shall establish within 12 months of 
effectiveness and maintain throughout Project implementation a Project Steering Committee (“PSC”) to provide 
overall strategic guidance and coordination for the Project. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Schedule 2, Section I.A.1(c) of the Financing Agreement: the Recipient shall establish by no later than three (3) 
months after the Effective Date, and thereafter maintain throughout the period of Project implementation, a 
Project Management Committee to serve as a platform for collaboration, management, troubleshooting and 
technical support for implementation of the Project including approving Annual Work Plans and Budgets and 
conducting quarterly progress review of Project implementation. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Schedule 2, Section I.B.2 of the Financing Agreement: For the purpose of the implementing Part 3 of the Project, 
the Recipient shall enter into agreement with the Somali National University, in the form and substance satisfactory 
to the Association, as further detailed in the Project Operations Manual. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Schedule 2, Section I.A.1(b) of the Financing Agreement: the Recipient shall establish and thereafter maintain 
within the Ministry of Education, Culture and Higher Education throughout the period of Project implementation, a 
Project Management Unit under terms ofreference acceptable to the Association and including a procurement 
specialist, a financial management specialist, an environmental specialist, a social specialist, a GBV specialist, 
monitoring and evaluation specialist and communication specialist. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Schedule 2, Section I.A.1(d) of the Financing Agreement: the Recipient shall maintain, throughout the period of 
implementation of the Project, the EAFS Unit, established within MoF’s Office of Accountant General, with 
competent, experienced and qualified staff, in sufficient numbers and under terms of reference acceptable to the 
Association. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Schedule 2, Section I.A.2 of the Financing Agreement: Prior to implementing any activities under Part 2 and 3 of the 
Project in, or for the benefit of, any Federal Member State, the Recipient shall cause that Federal Member States 
to:  
(a) enter into a subsidiary agreement in accordance with Sub-section I.B.1 of this Schedule 2; and (b) establish  
within the respective FMS-MoE, and thereafter maintain throughout the period Project implementation, a state 
implementation unit. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Schedule 2, Section I.E of the Financing Agreement: The Recipient shall select and engage, by no later than six (6) 
months after the Effective Date, and thereafter retain throughout the period of implementation of the Project, the 
services of a duly qualified and experienced monitoring consultant satisfactory to the Association, under terms of 
reference acceptable to the Association, in order to monitor the achievement of the Project’s objectives. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 104  
     
 
Schedule 2, Section I.D of the Financing Agreement: The Recipient, through its Project  Management Unit and with 
the assistance of the FMS Implementation Units, shall: (a) prepare and furnish to the Association on an annual 
basis, by no later than November 1st ofeach year, commencing on November 1, 2021, the annual work plan and 
budget containing all activities proposed to be included in the Project during the following Fiscal Year, and a 
proposed financing plan (setting forth the proposed amounts and sources of financing including the portion of 
Counterpart Funds to be provided) for expenditures required for such activities. The Annual Work Plan and Budget 
for the first year of Project implementation shall be prepared by the Recipient by not later than three (3) months 
after the Effective Date. 
 
 
 
 
Conditions 
  
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
The Recipient has established the Project Management Unit 
pursuant to the provision of Section I.A.1(b) of Schedule 2 to this 
Agreement, in a manner and substance satisfactory to the 
Association. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
The Recipient has adopted the Project Operations Manual pursuant 
to the provision of Section I.C.1 of Schedule 2 the Financing 
Agreement, in manner and substance satisfactory to the 
Association. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Disbursement 
IBRD/IDA 
Under Category (2) until: (i) arrangements for flow of funds out of 
the Grant proceeds allocated for activities in Somaliland are in 
place,  in substance and form satisfactory to the Association; (ii) the 
Somaliland Manual has been adopted by Somaliland; and (iii) 
institutional arrangements, satisfactory to the Association and 
detailed in the Somaliland Manual, as shall be required to carrying 
out the Project in Somaliland are in place. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Disbursement 
IBRD/IDA 
Under Category 1(b) until the Recipient has: (i) prepared, adopted  
and publicly disclosed the Labor Management Procedures, the 
Security Management Framework, the Security Management Plan, 
and the  GBV Action Plan in a manner and substance satisfactory to 
the Association; (ii) established an accessible Project grievance 
redress mechanism, in a manner and substance satisfactory to the 
Association; and (iii) undertaken capacity assessment for the 
implementation of the E&S requirements in a manner and 
substance satisfactory to the Association. 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 104  
     
 
    
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 104  
     
 
  
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
 
A. Country Context 
 
1. 
Somalia has been making steady progress toward stabilization and institutional progress after 
over two decades of protracted conflict. The adoption of the Provisional Constitution in 2011, and the 
establishment of the Federal Government after peaceful presidential elections in 2012 and in 2017, has 
helped set the country on a path to recovery. The Provisional Constitution established the basis for a 
federal political system. The federal system includes five Federal Member States (FMS) – Galmudug, 
Hirshabelle, Jubbaland, Puntland and South West and the federally administered Banadir Administration.1 
Although not internationally recognized, Somaliland declared independence in 1991 and does not 
participate in the federal system. Recently, institutional reforms and the establishment of transparent 
administrative structures have helped develop core public sector functionalities. Following steady 
progress, Somalia has reengaged with the international community through commencing the debt relief 
process and reaching the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative Decision Point in March 2020.  
 
2. 
Somalia’s economy has grown at a moderate pace, averaging 2.5 percent between 2013–17, 
but remains vulnerable to shocks. Growth is mainly consumption driven, enabled by large remittances 
and aid inflows (US$1.4 billion and US$1.75 billion, respectively in 2017). Despite this progress, Somalia 
remains one of the poorest and least developed countries in Africa with a Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
of approximately US$315 per capita in 2018, and high vulnerability to frequent shocks. The effects of a 
triple crisis of floods, locust infestation and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), are estimated to have 
had a substantial impact on the economy in 2020, with growth downgraded from 3.2 percent before the 
onset of the health pandemic to negative 0.4 percent,2 mainly due to a fall in remittances and decline in 
livestock export. At the household level, education can reduce impact of shocks. Households headed by 
an illiterate person are 12 to 24 percent more likely to report experiencing drought and loss of crops and 
livestock than households headed by someone with some education.3 
 
3. 
Nearly 70 percent of the population of Somalia lives below the poverty line (US$1.90 a day in 
purchasing power parity terms, 2017). Another 10 percent lives close to the poverty line, vulnerable to 
shocks. Almost nine out of ten Somali households are deprived of at least one fundamental dimension: 
money, electricity, education, or water and sanitation. Access to services is particularly limited for those 
living in rural areas, including nomads and internally displaced settlements, where poverty is deepest and 
markets, health facilities and schools are scarce.  
 
4. 
Years of conflict, instability, and violence have led to extremely low investments in human 
capital formation and left several generations of Somalis unable to achieve their potential. Lack of 
access to schooling and consequent low education level of the population pose significant constraints to 
Somalia’s human capital development. Somalia does not have a Human Capital Index (HCI)4 due to 
 
1 Banadir is not yet recognized as a state and is under the jurisdiction of FGS until its status changes. 
2 World Bank estimates 
3 World Bank 2019. Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment.  
4 Human Capital Index is part of the Human Capital Project of the World Bank and ranks countries according to the human 
development outcomes of their children and youth. It measures the amount of human capital that a child born today can 
expect to attain by age 18, given the risks of poor health and poor education that prevail in the country where they live. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 104  
     
 
unavailability of data on education outcomes, specifically learning achievement. However, comparison 
with other countries in the region shows extremely low participation in education, implying very low levels 
of human capital development. Figure 1 compares Somalia’s performance on enrollment at the primary 
level with other countries with low HCI values.  
 
Figure 1. HCI and gross enrollment rates 
 
Source: Based on data from HCI, World Bank and Facing Forward: Schooling for Learning in Africa, World Bank, 2018 
 
5. 
Investing in Somalia’s human capital will be essential for the country to move out of a cycle of 
violence, instability and vulnerability. An estimated 55 percent of population is under the age of 15 and 
with a fertility rate of 6.9 children, this age cohort continues to expand rapidly.5 With adequate 
investments in building the skills and productivity of its young population, Somalia could accelerate its 
efforts towards building prosperity and reducing instability in the country. Education could also play a 
critical role in reducing fertility, specifically with a focus on girls’ education. The Somalia Health and 
Demographic Survey (SHDS) 2020 finds that, for women with no education, the total fertility rate is twice 
as high, at 7.2, compared to women with higher education, at 3.7. 
 
6. 
Expanding education will not only be critical for state-building, but also addressing the drivers 
of conflict and fragility in Somalia. Provision of basic services, such as water and sanitation, health and 
primary education, is recognized as a priority for conflict-affected situations for peacebuilding.6  Each year 
of education is estimated to reduce the risk of conflict by around 20 percent.7 Moreover, expanding access 
to education is also a means of socialization and identity development through the transmission of 
knowledge, skills, values and attitudes across generations which can contribute to breaking the cycle of 
violence and fragility.  
 
B. Sector Context 
 
7. 
Limited progress in improving education outcomes is one of the main constraints to human 
capital development in Somalia. The education system is still evolving and continues to be highly 
 
5 Somalia Health and Demographic Survey 2019. 
6 United Nation (UN) General Assembly, Report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of 
conflict, 11 June 2009, A/63/881–S/2009/304, available at: https://www.refworld.org/docid/4a4c6c3b2.html 
7 Inter-agency Network for Education in Emergencies (INEE) 
38
32
42
38
37
29
32
30
32
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sudan
Mali
Senegal
Burkina
Faso
Guinea
Central
African
Republic
Liberia
Chad
Niger
Somalia
Percentage
Out of school children
Gross Enrollment Rate
Human Capital Index
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 104  
     
 
fragmented, leading to weak sector outcomes. Access to education has remained low over the last two 
decades with girls, those in rural areas and poor households disproportionately excluded from schooling 
opportunities. Lastly, what limited education is provided is of low quality due to poor quality of teaching.  
 
Education system organization 
 
8. 
The current Somali education system emerged in 2012 with the establishment of the Federal 
Government of Somalia (FGS). The Provisional Constitution of the Federal Republic of Somalia established 
free primary and secondary education as the basic right of all Somali citizens. Though not fully codified in 
law, the Ministry of Education, Culture and Higher Education (MoECHE) at the federal government level 
is responsible for the overall guidance and administration of education in Somalia. The MoECHE has been 
collaborating with national and international stakeholders to develop Education Sector Strategic Plans 
(ESSP), the current of which runs from 2018-2020 with a new one currently under development.8 A 
multiyear effort is also underway to develop a new national competency-based curriculum, which 
integrates issues of conflict-sensitivity and peace building. Administrative structures of the MoECHE have 
been established only in the last few years, starting from scratch. As a result, capacity of the Ministry is 
generally low with high reliance on external advisors funded by development partners (DPs) for core 
functions.  
 
9. 
The governance structure of the education system in Somalia is evolving. The Federal 
Government of Somalia and Banadir, Galmudug, HirShabelle, Jubaland and Southwest have recently 
agreed in a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to work cooperatively in matters related to the 
education sector and agreed upon the roles and responsibilities of each level of government.9 Under the 
agreement, the MoECHE is mandated to develop regulatory frameworks, e.g., Education Acts and policies 
and coordination while the Federal Member States are responsible for service delivery and 
implementation of education programs and policies. The FMS have established their own state-level 
Ministries of Education, laws and policies. They participate in intergovernmental forums organized to 
discuss key education sector issues, but participation varies and there is room to strengthen this 
coordination.  
 
10. 
Federal Member States are building institutional structures to enable operationalization of their 
roles in education service delivery. With support from the Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing (RCRF) 
project supported by the World Bank, Ministries of Education at the FMS level have begun establishing 
mechanisms for teacher payroll management and establishing systems for teacher recruitment and 
management. Puntland also contributes to payments to teachers from its own resources (up to 20 
percent) as a condition of RCRF financing. Importantly, the foundation for an inter-governmental financing 
framework to enable FGS to FMS budgetary transfers has been established under RCRF. However, overall 
capacity remains weak and FMS needs to put further effort to raise and use their own resources for 
education delivery at their level with support, both financial and technical, from the Federal Government.  
 
 
8 Somaliland and Puntland have been developing their own ESSPs. 
9 National Education Conference Declaration, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) media, 
http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/ED/pdf/NEC-declaration.pdf  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 104  
     
 
Box 1: Somaliland education structure 
Somaliland declared independence from Somalia in May 1991 and has since undergone a relatively 
successful process of post-conflict peace building and reconstruction with three successful elections 
since 2002. The relative peace and stability in Somaliland has given the government an opportunity to 
invest in basic service delivery, including education. It has developed the Somaliland National Policy of 
Education (SNPE, 2015-2030), which articulates commitment to provide quality, affordable and 
competitive education to all citizens towards the achievements of the Sustainable Development Goals. 
It articulates education as a tool for national economic development, the transformation of lives at the 
individual, community, and national levels, and for promoting peace between communities and 
national stability. 
The SNPE focuses on the reconstruction and development of education in Somaliland. Priorities of the 
SNPE include (i) expanded access and equity for all Somaliland children at all levels of education, 
regardless of their socio-economic background and physical status; (ii) quality, relevance of education, 
and learning outcomes; (iii)  an efficient and effective education system; and (iv) a strong and functional 
management system of education from the central to devolved levels, including disaster management 
and emergency response to minimize negative impact on students. As a part of the SNPE, the 
government declared Free Primary Education in 2011 whose implementation is ongoing across 
Somaliland but has not been fully achieved.  
Education is managed by the Ministry of Education and Science at the central level. In 2014, the 
Government of Somaliland approved the Somaliland Decentralization Policy 2013-2020, which 
provided the political, administrative, and financial plans to decentralize service delivery to districts 
with sufficient capacity prioritizing social sectors, including education. Decentralization of education 
services is based on a phased approach defined by capacity assessments of the local governments at 
each classification category. 
 
11. 
Experience from Somaliland and Puntland indicates that, with sufficient policy and capacity-
building support, it is possible to transfer decision making, finance and management responsibilities to 
districts for the delivery of education services. There are 93 districts across Somalia (including in 
Somaliland). Districts are responsible for overseeing delivery of basic education, but their capacity is 
severely limited. In Banadir and the four FMS, few districts have functional governance structures. 
However, in Somaliland and Puntland where district capacity has been built over the years, several 
districts were able to finance a share of education services from local revenues. These nascent structures 
will need to be strengthened significantly across all the districts to enable implementation of the national 
policy and for sustained delivery of services to the country’s citizens. 
 
12. 
At the school level, Community Education Committees (CECs) have been playing a prominent 
role in addressing concerns related to teacher accountability and student absenteeism. Most schools in 
Somalia have a CEC. CECs mostly comprise of parents, members of the local community, and can include 
local elders, teachers, education authorities, or other community members with management experience. 
Members are often selected from parents of current students based on their social standing in the 
community and their abilities. By providing a forum for parents and community stakeholders to voice their 
concerns to the school management, CECs help hold school management accountable. CEC members 
sometimes oversee quality of provision and are involved in teacher recruitment and management of 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 104  
     
 
payroll. Teachers and headmasters often use CECs to communicate with parents, for example to address 
the issue of students dropping out of school.  
 
13. 
In the last three decades, nonstate actors have become a prominent provider of schooling in 
many parts of Somalia. In the absence of a strong public system during the period of instability, these 
nonstate actors, which include local communities, private providers, numerous international donors 
including Somali diaspora, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and umbrella associations10 assumed 
key roles in reconstructing schools, education service delivery, and regulation. Given the importance of 
religious education in the country, many children attend informal Quranic schools, sometimes in addition 
to attending a formal primary or secondary school. These institutes teach students to read, write, and 
recite the Quran. In 2006, the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF) 
introduced Integrated Quranic schools (IQS) that employ qualified teachers who teach both the secular 
and religious curricula and are considered part of the formal education system.11 This multitude of 
education actors has led to greater fragmentation of the system, which uses a variety of curriculum, 
education cycles,12 languages of instruction, and learning standards across the country. About 55 percent 
of students are estimated to be enrolled in nonstate schools across Somalia. Details on nonstate education 
providers are provided in Annex 2. 
 
14. 
MoECHE needs to significantly strengthen stewardship of the sector to put it on a sustainable 
path to development and ensure efficiency and efficacy of expenditure. The Federal Government’s role 
in education management has been limited due to its weak capacity. However, for sustainable and 
coherent development of the sector, MoECHE will need to play a key role. First and foremost, this will 
include brokering an agreement on a national framework for setting education policy that provides for a 
federal role in establishing system-wide standards and norms. A key role of MoECHE would be to ensure 
alignment and coherence across various legal and policy instruments. Local government laws, 
decentralization policies, and education sector guidelines such as the ESSP need to reflect a common 
understanding of the division of functions and responsibilities across administrative levels to strengthen 
the enabling environment for decentralized education services. Given the large role of the nonstate 
sector, there is need to strengthen oversight of nonstate schools and networks. Data management 
systems need to be bolstered, including adoption of uniform data protocols and establishment of clear 
flow of data between schools, state authorities, and federal authorities for planning, open information 
exchange, and follow-up, as well as reporting on donor financing and activity in the sector.    
 
Access to education  
 
15. 
Somalia has one of the lowest education enrollment rates in the world. The primary gross 
enrollment rate (GER) is estimated to be 20 percent, on average, with approximately 3 million primary-
 
10 Umbrella associations refer to specific networks of non-state schools in Somalia. Many of these umbrellas were originally 
founded by former teachers to associate schools in the absence of central authority in the 1990s and have grown to incorporate 
hundreds of schools across the country. Over 1000 schools are either directly managed by an umbrella or more loosely 
associated with an umbrella network.   
11 The first IQS was initiated in a pilot project together with the government in Somaliland in 2006. The concept was expanded 
within the Strategic Partnership for the Recovery and Development of Education in Somalia that UNICEF, UNESCO, and UK 
formed (UNICEF, Evaluation Report. The Integrated Quranic Schools Pilot Project, 2011). 
12 Private institutions follow a 9+3 cycle with 9 years of primary and 3 years of secondary and public schools an 8+4 cycle. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 104  
     
 
aged children (5-14 years) out of school.13 Somalia’s GER is significantly below sub-Saharan Africa, low 
income countries’ and fragile-and-conflict-affected countries’ averages of 99 percent, 102 percent and 94 
percent, respectively.  
 
16. 
Large parts of the country remain underserved. Of the 93 districts in the country, one-third have 
GERs less than 10 percent, indicating acutely low access to education. Table 1 summarizes the number of 
schools and students in Somalia by FMS and for Somaliland. Education is mostly provided by a variety of 
nonstate actors who are primarily located in urban and peri-urban areas. Overall, 55 percent of students 
in Somalia who are enrolled in school are in nonstate, mostly fee-charging schools, although this varies by 
region. In Banadir, Galmudug, HirShabelle, Jubbaland and Southwest, over 90 percent of enrollment is in 
nonstate schools. In Puntland and Somaliland, however, most students are enrolled in public schools. 
These areas have been able to expand coverage of education services through public provision with 
significantly higher levels of enrollment. 
 
Table 1: Number of schools and students in Somalia by level 
FMS  
Number of Schools 
Number of students 
Primary 
Secondary 
Total 
Primary  
Secondary  
Total 
Banadir 
394 
310 
704 
115,217 
60,435 
175,652 
Galmudug 
135 
37 
172 
27,464 
6,405 
33,869 
HirShabelle 
103 
34 
137 
27,684 
6,713 
34,397 
Jubbaland 
205 
27 
232 
58,825 
5,378 
64,203 
South West  
105 
42 
147 
31,396 
7,125 
38,521 
Puntland 
653 
96 
749 
143,546 
25,116 
168,662 
Somaliland 
1083 
100 
1183 
234,128 
51,011 
285,139 
SOMALIA 
2,678 
646 
3,324 
638,260 
162,183 
800,443 
Source: Somalia Ministry of Education, Culture and Higher Education data 
 
17. 
There are significantly fewer educational opportunities for rural children. It is estimated that 55 
percent of the population resides in rural areas, however, only 35 percent of those in school are in rural 
areas. This points to significant inequities in the distribution of educational resources (e.g., schools, 
teachers, learning materials) between rural and urban areas. As an example, in the central southern 
states, 86 percent of all primary school teachers are in urban areas, although only half the population 
resides in these areas.14 To reduce inequities in education provision, a workable model for education 
delivery for the hard-to-reach rural areas will be needed. 
 
18. 
Girls are at a distinct disadvantage. Seventy-two percent of 15-49-year-old women living in rural 
areas and 59 percent of women from urban areas have never attended formal schooling. The gender gap 
in school enrollment is wide with girls estimated to account for 43 percent of those enrolled in school in 
Somalia. In Somaliland too, girls are underrepresented with a gender parity index of 0.83. Large distances 
to school, which leads to increased risks of gender-based violence, create barriers to girls accessing 
education services. Importantly, over 90 percent of primary school teachers in Somalia (85 percent in 
Somaliland) are male. Evidence shows that female teachers lead to significant increases in enrollment and 
 
13 Based on United Nations Population Fund population data and 2019 EMIS data from MoECHE.  
14 ESA, p. 125.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 104  
     
 
retention of female learners in schools. Social norms around early marriage, expectations that girls 
support households and rearing of younger siblings and greater ‘social value’ in boys accessing education 
over girls also contribute to the lower enrollment rates of girls. The COVID-19 pandemic is expected to 
disproportionately impact girls, including by increasing the burden and constraints due to social 
expectations such as taking on household responsibilities and care-related tasks. 
 
Figure 2: Women’s literacy and education attainment across population groups 
 
Source: Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Study (World Bank 2019) 
 
19. 
Surveys show that the main reasons for low enrollment of girls and rural communities are the 
unavailability of, and long distances to, school. Various sources of data show large average distances 
from school in Somalia which is the single largest constraint to participation in schooling at the primary 
level, especially for girls. Evidence from Fragile, Conflict and Violence (FCV) contexts including Afghanistan, 
Benin, and Zimbabwe shows that placing primary schools in close proximity to communities increases 
participation in education, specifically for girls.15 In Afghanistan, placing a school in a village dramatically 
improved academic participation and performance among all children, particularly for girls, whose 
enrollments increased by 52 percentage points, compared to an increase of 35 percentage points for boys, 
virtually eliminating the gender gap in enrollment.16 In Somalia, the availability of water, gender-
segregated water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) facilities, and the availability of sanitary materials for 
girls have also been shown to minimize the risk of girls dropping out of school.17  
 
20. 
Inability of parents to pay school fees constrains access to schooling where schools do exist. 
Since provision of education depends heavily on fee-paying schools, poor students are at a distinct 
disadvantage. The limited availability of public schools in large parts of the country handicaps those who 
cannot afford fees. Often nonstate schools are not even an option since operators do not find it viable to 
run schools in poor and disadvantaged areas. Over three-quarters of the Somali population live in poverty, 
which has resulted in highly unequal access rates for the disadvantaged who are neither served by state 
nor nonstate schools.18 However, households in the bottom forty percent that receive international 
diaspora remittances have substantially higher school enrollment than non-recipients, which indicates 
 
15 Deon Filmer, The Structure of Social Disparities in Education (2000). 
16 Burde and Linden, Bringing Education to Afghan Girls: A Randomized Controlled Trial of Village-Based Schools (2013) 
17 Somalia Education Cluster 2020 Response Strategy Note. 
18 World Bank, Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment: Findings from Wave 2 of the High Frequency Survey, July 2019. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 104  
     
 
that if households had the option of attending school, they would.  
 
Box 2: Empowering girls through SWEDD 
 
One of the most critical constraints to developing Somalia’s human capital centres on girls’ empowerment. 
Girls’ empowerment means equipping girls with the skills, information and opportunities to succeed in school, 
work and life. In Somalia, women and girls confront multiple dimensions of disempowerment and 
discrimination: i) human endowments (e.g. health and education); ii) access to economic opportunities and 
productive assets; and iii) voice and agency.1  
 
Taking a comprehensive approach to removing the layers of disadvantage faced by girls and young women, 
the World Bank program in Somalia is centered around supporting the Government’s holistic approach to 
delivering the building blocks that will be needed to empower girls in line with the Sahel Women’s 
Empowerment and Demographic Dividends (SWEDD) model. One critical aspect of this program is ensuring 
girls obtain the foundational education required to develop higher-order cognitive and technical skills needed 
to increase productivity and ensure inclusion with a strong focus on (i) bringing schools closer to home; (ii) 
making schools safe and welcoming places for girls; (iii) ensuring that costs are not a barrier; and (iv) building 
a mindset of inclusion in the school and community. 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 104  
     
 
21. 
On the demand side, food insecurity continues to be a significant challenge in Somalia with 5.2 
million people predicted to remain food insecure in 2020.19 The World Food Program (WFP) works with 
partners in Somalia  to provide food assistance to vulnerable households in several districts across the 
country.20 The World Bank is also supporting vulnerable households with cash transfers in selected 
districts under the Shock Responsive Safety Nets for Human Capital Project (SNHCP) (P171346) in Somalia 
and 65 percent of the villages served by SNHCP do not currently have a school. The Project will create 
linkages with demand side interventions supported by Safety Net operations to promote enrollment of 
children in schooling. First, where possible, the Project will target areas where these interventions exist 
to enable linkages. Second, SNHCP beneficiary households will be targeted to enroll children in nonstate 
schools free of cost.  
 
Quality 
 
22. 
There is no systematic information available on learning outcomes in Somalia. Few assessments 
of student learning at the primary level have been undertaken in Somalia; carried out by international 
NGOs often with limited government involvement and administered using very small samples or only 
in schools pre-selected as part of program evaluation exercises. Moreover, because each of these 
assessments was independently designed by a different third-party contractor and under a 
separately funded 
initiative, 
the 
findings 
were neither 
representative 
nor 
comparable 
across assessments, jurisdictions, and time periods.21 Until Somalia can generate systematic information 
on student learning, parents, teachers, policymakers, and DPs will continue to see education only in terms 
of inputs and enrollments and the country will be less able to improve  learning outcomes. Lessons 
learned from the efforts of other countries committed to assessment system development suggest that 
countries like Somalia can build assessment capacity and institutions relatively quickly on the basis of real-
world, practical experiences carried out under their own responsibility.22 
 
23. 
The limited information that is available points to low levels of learning. The most recent status 
of learning achievement can be estimated, to a limited degree, from Early Grade Math and Reading 
Assessments (EGMA and EGRA) conducted in 2018. Figure 3 summarizes the results of student 
achievement in Somali, English and Math. A total of 380 students from grades 5, 6, and 723 sat the 
assessment in 22 schools across five Federal Member States (Banadir, Galmudug, HirShabelle, Southwest, 
and Jubbaland). The assessments identified extremely low learning levels in Somali literacy, English 
literacy, and, to a lesser extent, mathematics.24 Learning levels in Somaliland are similarly low. An EGRA 
conducted by Save the Children in 2016 in Somaliland showed very low reading fluency levels (see table 
2). The results emphasize the need to ensure that learning is occurring in the early grades. By the time 
students reach the end of primary and early secondary school, they are well below the level of 
competency expected of children at these levels. This means students are not equipped with the 
foundation of skills required to engage with the content presented at higher levels.  
 
 
19 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Humanitarian response plan for Somalia (2020).  
20 WFP Somalia Country Brief, January 2020.  
21 Due of these limitations, learning data from Somalia cannot be used to place the country in the Human Capital Index. 
22 Final Russia Education Aid for Development Trust Fund Report: 2008-2015 (World Bank, 2016). 
23 EGRA and EGMA are intended to assess Grade 4 competencies 
24 All results taken from Wafula and Mulongo, “Are children in South and Central Somalia accessing education, and are they 
learning? Baseline information”, Social Sciences and Humanities Open, 2020.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 104  
     
 
Figure 3: Results of 2018 EGRA and EGMA in Somalia 
 
Source: Social Sciences and Humanities Open, “Are children in South and Central Somalia accessing education, and 
are they learning? Baseline information”, 2020. 
 
Table 2: Somaliland EGRA (2016) findings 
Reading level 
% of students at level 
Zero readers (0 words per minute) 
8 
Low readers (1-45 words per minute) 
45 
Emergent readers (45-60 words per minute) 
41 
Fluent readers (>60 words per minute) 
6 
Source: Save the Children, Somaliland EGRA Report, 2016 
 
24. 
The gaps in learning are reflective of a teaching force ill-qualified to prepare learners to become 
productive members of society. Only 37.9 percent of primary teachers across all Somalia are qualified 
with the lowest number qualified in Banadir, Galmudug, HirShabelle, Jubaland and Southwest (20.8 
percent). The situation is relatively better in Somaliland with a higher proportion of certified teachers at 
55 percent. A Teacher Proficiency Testing (TPT) exercise in 2019, designed to measure teachers’ 
understanding of both pedagogical approaches and content knowledge in Mathematics, Somali Language, 
Islamic Studies, and English Language, provides useful information on teacher quality. The TPT was 
administered in the Banadir region. The results, presented in Figure 4, indicate that teacher capacity is 
low, with teachers lacking both pedagogical skills and content knowledge.  
 
Figure 4: Results of Teacher Proficiency Test (pass rate) 
 
Source: Banadir Teacher Proficiency Test Report, 2019 
 
25. 
While these results reflect the poor levels of teacher capacity, of particular concern is the low 
pedagogical knowledge. More than 80 percent of teachers do not understand basic pedagogical 
approaches and are therefore not able to provide active and engaging learning environments for their 
0%
50%
100%
Overall
Female
Male
Overall
Female
Male
Overall
Female
Male
EGRA (Somali)
EGRA (English
EGMA
Grade 5
Grade 6
Grade 7
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Pedagogy
Mathematics
Somali Language
Islamic Studies
English Language
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 104  
     
 
students. This is compounded by low content knowledge. Notably, teachers in Banadir are amongst the 
most qualified in Somalia, suggesting that teacher capacity in other FMS may be a bigger concern. Of the 
teachers from public schools participating in the TPT, approximately 61 percent had at least a bachelor’s 
degree or higher. By contrast, only 21.1 percent of teachers across the country have obtained a teaching 
qualification. It is reasonable to expect teacher proficiency to be even poorer in other areas of Somalia. 
 
26. 
Developing in-service teacher capacity is a priority for Somalia, however, the logistics are 
complex. Approximately 30,000 teachers require training and development across the country. Face-to-
face training is impractical due to the large numbers to be trained, risks associated with movement, and 
the need for teachers to be in schools teaching. While these challenges are substantial, Somalia is 
equipped with assets that can be leveraged to improve education outcomes. This includes information 
and communications technology (ICT) infrastructure that has been substantially improved over the last 
ten years. In 2000, Somalia had only 200 internet users. By 2017 this had grown to 1.2 million users, or 
more than 10 percent of the population. Mobile penetration is also high, with approximately 90 percent 
of Somalis above the age of 16 years old possessing a phone, 30.8 percent of which are smartphones. This 
provides a unique opportunity to deliver education solutions that incorporate digital approaches.  
 
Box 3: COVID-19 impact on the Somalia education sector and response 
The first cases of COVID-19 in Somalia were reported in March 2020. As of May 18, 2021, 14,632 
laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19, including 767 associated deaths, have been reported in 
Somalia. To avoid rapid spread of the virus, the Government of Somalia announced the closure of 
schools due to the COVID-19 outbreak on March 18, 2020 (March 19 in Somaliland). The closure 
impacted over 5,000 functional schools in Somalia and Somaliland, both public and nonstate. Schools 
in Somalia were reopened in mid-August following these initial closures. Schools were closed again on 
March 8, 2021 following a third wave of COVID-19 cases in the country.  
 
School closures are expected to have a deep impact on already weak education outcomes of the 
country. Although national estimates of the dropout due to COVID-19 closures are not available, 
UNICEF estimates that since schools reopened, five percent of children have not re-enrolled in UNICEF 
supported schools. Children are also likely to lose substantial amounts of learning time while schools 
are closed, and many may be unable to re-enter when schools reopen due to household financial 
hardships that will grow during the crisis. In the months during school closures, there was a reported 
16.3 percent increase in child labor and 14.7 percent increase of children forced to do hard work,25 
reflective of the many impacts of school closures on Somali children.  
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the MoECHE has developed the Somalia Education Sector 
COVID-19 Response Plan to address the short- and long-term impacts of the pandemic on the 
education sector and to plan for safe reopening of schools.26 Somaliland has prepared its own plan. 
The objectives of the Plans are to (i) support teachers, learners and school communities to prevent the 
transmission and spread of COVID-19; (ii) ensure continuity of learning through the implementation of 
key activities aimed at maintaining quality learning and wellbeing of teachers, learners and school 
communities during the COVID-19 emergency, such as radio programs; and (iii) facilitate the safe return 
 
25 UNICEF COVID-19 Situation Report No. 10, 2020 
26 Somalia Education Sector COVID-19 Response Plan (as of June 24, 2020) 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 104  
     
 
to quality learning for teachers, learners and school communities after the COVID-19 emergency. A 
contextualized version of the global document Safe Back to School: A Practitioner’s Guide has been 
created for Somalia in consultation with MoECHE staff at national and state level as well as education 
sector partners and the Education Cluster. The Guidelines are to be followed by all schools and learning 
institutions including public, community, private, and Alternate Basic Education (ABE) schools. School 
management is encouraged to engage their school communities and local government for support to 
implement the School Re-opening Guidelines. Global Partnership for Education (GPE) is financing large 
parts of the COVID-19 plan. It is providing US$5.4 million for FGS, US$2.3 million for Somaliland and 
US$1.3 million for Puntland to implement their COVID-19 response plans. 
The pandemic has accelerated the use of technology in education delivery providing rich lessons for 
how technology can be used to increase access to education and improve quality. For instance, the 
Ministry of Education in Puntland has been working on the development of alternative learning content 
for all grades. It is expected that this material will complement the learning processes as schools re-
open. In Somaliland, online learning platforms such as Tabsera Online Platform, a virtual classroom 
launched by one of the local telecommunication companies called Telesom and RaadAcademy, a web-
based platform that gathers pre-recorded online video lessons have been launched. 
The Project will take several measures to build resilience of the Somalia education system against 
impact of COVID-19 and other future events. First, it proposes to use digital technology for critical 
activities such as teacher professional development to enable continuity in situations of school closures 
and restrictions on gatherings. Second, it enables the government to implement its response plan by 
providing adequate WASH facilities and classrooms to avoid overcrowding of classrooms and thus 
transmission. Third, the Project will support interventions that support the teaching-learning process 
both in and out of school through provision of teaching-learning material from grants provided to 
schools. Lastly, it will coordinate closely with DPs for expansion of government efforts to provide 
alternate learning resources such as radio programs in Project supported areas. 
 
27. 
As Somalia progresses toward rebuilding after decades of conflict and instability, weak 
education outcomes will need to be addressed to develop the full potential of its human capital. Within 
the multitude of challenges the country faces, prioritization is needed to educate the large numbers of 
out of school children with a focus on ensuring that girls participate in schooling across the country. First, 
attention will need to be paid to defining a strategic  policy framework for rebuilding the education system 
in which both the public and nonstate sector address the challenges of access, equity and quality in a 
strategic and sustainable manner to make progress on education outcomes. Second, to make quick gains, 
feasible solutions for rapidly expanding access to schooling opportunities need to leverage strengths 
within the system such as an active nonstate sector and strong community involvement. These solutions 
will need to ensure that constraints to girls accessing schooling are addressed and incentives are built into 
the approaches to attract and retain girls in school. Third, attention to quality of education will be critical 
to build human capital through improving the quality of Somalia’s teachers.   
 
28. 
A plan is in place to address the impact of COVID-19 on an already weak system. In response to 
the COVID-19 pandemic and as detailed in Box 3, above, the MoECHE has developed the Somalia 
Education Sector COVID-19 Response Plan to address the short- and long-term impacts of the pandemic 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 104  
     
 
on the education sector and to plan for a safe reopening of schools.27 The Project will complement these 
efforts with an aim to build the resilience of the system to ensure continuity of learning in the event of 
future situations that disrupt regular provision of education services.  
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
 
29. 
The proposed Project is aligned with the World Bank Group’s strategic priorities, particularly its 
mission to end extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity. The Project focuses on the most 
disadvantaged parts of the country and aims to provide them opportunities for human capital 
development through quality education. World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 
Somalia (FY19-22; Report no. 124734-SO),28 recognizes that, with 75 percent of the population under the 
age of 30, low educational attainment constrains future economic growth and poverty reduction and puts 
youth at risk. Consequently, the CPF includes building institutions for basic service delivery as one of its 
two focus areas. The Project responds directly to this challenge by creating schooling opportunities in 
Somalia at the primary education level to reduce learning poverty in the country. It will aim to ensure that 
this schooling leads to learning and that girls participate equally in schooling. The objective of the Project 
is fully aligned with the core objectives of the ESSP (2018-20) and the recently approved Somalia National 
Development Plan (NDP-9) (2020-2024). Both the NDP-9 and the ESSP, identify equitable access to quality 
education, effective and accountable public service delivery and oversight institutions and establishment 
of partnerships to reach the most vulnerable groups and communities as key priority areas. The objectives 
of the Project are also aligned with Somalia Education Sector COVID-19 Response Plan’s Objective 2: 
Access to Education and Wellbeing that aims to provide access to distance learning, particularly to girls, 
vulnerable and marginalized children, as school closures, combined with a lack of alternative education 
learning options, have significantly impacted students’ opportunities to learn. As part of the Project’s 
objective to support enhanced instruction quality, provision of digital devices and delivery of digital 
content will ensure that teachers can continue to teach and build their capacity, and that children can 
continue to learn even during times of pandemics and other shocks in the future. The objectives of the 
Project are well aligned with the National Reopening Plan.  
 
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 
A. Project Development Objective 
 
PDO Statement 
 
Increase access to primary education in underserved areas, with a focus on girls, and improve quality of 
instruction. 
 
PDO Level Indicators 
(a) Gross Enrollment Rate (GER) at primary level in target districts, by gender (percent). 
(b) Number of students enrolled in project-supported primary schools, by gender (number). 
(c) Number of teachers certified after successfully completing teacher professional 
 
27 Somalia Education Sector COVID-19 Response Plan (as of June 24, 2020) 
28 See Annex 6 for changes to Somalia program as a result of COVID-19 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 104  
     
 
development program, by gender (number). 
(d) Establishment of a national system for measuring student learning outcomes (yes/no). 
 
B. Project Components 
 
30. 
The Project will have national coverage.29 To maximize impact of the Project in improving overall 
access to schooling, the focus will be on a selected number of districts distributed across Somalia 
(provisionally, 14 out of a total of 93 districts30) that have the lowest participation in education (as 
measured by gross enrollment rates). The districts selected have few, if any, government schools and face 
the highest levels of fragility and poverty. Through the Project, the government will be able to establish 
its presence through basic service delivery in these districts which is expected to establish trust with its 
citizens through inclusive and constructive integration of individuals and communities, socially, politically 
and economically, which can contribute to conflict prevention and long-term peacebuilding.  
 
31. 
Project interventions will focus on: (1) building core FMS and FGS systems to sustainably deliver, 
measure, and improve education outcomes; (2) increasing the supply of schools with a focus on promoting 
gender and geographic equity and quality; (3) fostering effective teaching and assessment practices 
through training, coaching, and technology-based solutions; and (4) ensuring inputs are learning-focused, 
especially in terms of making the schooling environment and learning materials more learner friendly and 
aligned with teaching needs. 
 
Component 1: System building (US$5 million equivalent)  
 
32. 
This component will provide support to the government for developing and operationalizing 
fundamental elements of a functional education system. Establishing minimum functionality of the 
government to manage and monitor the education system will be critical for coherence and sustainability 
of sector investments. This component will support this goal through: (i) strengthening the capacity of the 
federal government to establish common standards and policies in relation to teachers, school 
management and regulation of the nonstate sector through intergovernmental collaboration; (ii) 
establishing a national student assessment system to systematically measure learning achievement and 
use its findings to improve education quality and increase learning for all over time; and (iii) strengthening 
capacity of the federal and state ministries of education for regular and reliable monitoring of the sector 
and evaluation of key initiatives to generate data and evidence for future investments.  
 
Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening government’s stewardship role (US$1 million equivalent) 
 
33. 
This subcomponent will finance technical assistance and intergovernmental dialog to develop 
regulatory and policy frameworks on (i) teacher standards and management; (ii) community role in 
service delivery; and (iii) regulation of nonstate providers. The subcomponent will support activities 
related to consensus-building among the various stakeholders in the sector at the federal and subnational 
level to promote standardization and coherence of sector policy and practice across the different 
government levels and providers. The subcomponent will also invest in strengthening MoECHE’s capacity 
 
29 Funds will be set aside for Somaliland under component 2 of the Project – see component description for more details.  
30 This includes two districts in Somaliland. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 104  
     
 
for sector stewardship including, inter alia: coordinating external finance; integrating external financing 
into on-budget systems; managing multiple DPs and NGOs; aligning implementation models, operating 
procedures, and quality control standards across the FMS; and closing coverage gaps.  
    
Subcomponent 1.2: Establishing a national student learning assessment system (US$3 million 
equivalent) 
 
34. 
This sub-component will support the establishment of a national learning assessment system 
that is aligned with the new curriculum and capable of generating data on student learning in a 
systematic, reliable, and credible manner. The Project will: (i) build the institutional framework for the 
system; (ii) foster the capacity of assessment system staff to analyze and utilize assessment findings to 
inform teacher training and curriculum implementation, and the delivery of better instruction to raise 
learning outcomes for all; and (iii) field-test a trial assessment toolkit to promote learning by doing and 
help make the system operational. To establish the system, the sub-component will support three 
interrelated clusters of activities to be completed by the close of the Project.   
 
35. 
Institutional framework for the system. MoECHE will establish the assessment system’s 
institutional home within its examinations department and ensure that the department has the mandate, 
authority, and buy-in from the FMSs to design, administer, analyze, and disseminate findings from a 
national learning assessment. It will also develop an assessment system strategy that sets out its vision 
and aims, policies, organizational structure, financing needs, and staffing requirements - including the 
roles and responsibilities of key personnel. Also in this cluster, government will articulate the assessment 
framework to define key elements of the system including the subjects and grade levels that will be 
assessed and how frequently, the scope of the curriculum domains and the knowledge and skills that will 
be measured in each subject, descriptions of core learning levels and proficiency levels to be achieved in 
each domain, subject, and grade, and the format and administration of the assessment. Key outputs of 
this cluster will be the institutional structure and mandate, the assessment strategy, and the assessment 
framework.  
 
36. 
Building capacity for implementation. The second cluster will focus on ensuring that the 
assessment system team possesses the qualified human resources needed to implement the strategy. 
Through recruitment, consultant selection, and staff training, the Project will support the formation of a 
core professional cadre with the competencies needed to implement the strategy. To build this cadre, the 
Project will identify professional development programs and training activities in leadership, management 
and administration, survey design, item and test development and analysis, sampling methodology, 
applied education data analysis, and communications, among other skills to be identified during the 
strategy elaboration.  Key outputs of this cluster will be the terms of reference and organogram for the 
professional cadre, a qualifications matrix, training needs appraisal, training plan, and terms of reference 
for professional development programs, mostly virtually-run, outside of Somalia.  
 
37. 
Field-testing of national student learning assessments. In the third cluster, the Project will 
support the assessment unit to develop and conduct field-tests of the assessment toolkit to serve as a 
practical exercise for operationalizing the system, refining the assessment matrix, and strengthening the 
unit’s skillset. These exercises will strengthen the capability of the assessment unit through learning by 
doing and will draw on previous experience administering EGRA and EGMA in Mogadishu, Hargeisa and 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 104  
     
 
Garowe. The assessment unit will review and identify lessons learned from the field-tests, including 
through workshops with FMS and other stakeholders and technical experts. The key outputs from this 
cluster will be the trial assessment toolkit, findings from administering the assessments, national 
assessment reports, lessons-learned reports, and updates of the assessment strategy, assessment 
framework, and training plan based on the lessons learned.    
 
Subcomponent 1.3: Strengthening system-level monitoring and evaluation (US$1 million equivalent) 
 
38. 
This subcomponent will support the federal and state ministries to strengthen monitoring of 
the sector and evaluating key initiatives to generate evidence on priority areas of the ESSP. MoECHE 
has recently piloted a new Education Management Information Systems (EMIS) platform that will digitally 
register learners. This subcomponent will complement and provide support in the operationalization of 
the EMIS and data collection at the school level. It will encourage evidence-based decision making by using 
data to drive intergovernmental discussion on sector issues and identify initiatives that show promise. 
This subcomponent will also finance detailed iterative evaluation of project interventions (see component 
3), to ensure investments produce results as expected during implementation and identifying measures 
to further improve system efficiency. It will also support an evaluation of the Nonstate Schools Incentive 
Program (NSIP) (see component 2). Finally, this subcomponent will finance an evaluation of recruitment 
practices to promote hiring of female teachers in the workforce. 
 
Component 2: Expansion of access to quality schooling for the disadvantaged (US$22 million) 
 
39. 
The component will provide out-of-school children from disadvantaged backgrounds with 
access to good quality schooling opportunities at no cost to their families. An estimated 100,000 
additional children will be enrolled in primary school in 14 targeted districts (including in Somaliland), at 
least 50 percent girls. Districts have been selected from across the country with priority for those that 
have the lowest enrollment rates. Other factors for consideration in district selection are accessibility from 
a security perspective, presence of demand-side interventions, and equal distribution across FMS. 
Beneficiary communities in the targeted districts will be selected based on the findings of a needs survey 
to identify communities that meet objective criteria, specifically those with the highest need in terms of 
out-of-school children (see details of the district and school site selection process and criteria in Annex 3).  
 
40. 
Funding will be available to Somaliland for implementation of activities under Component 2 in 
the two targeted Somaliland districts. Approximately US$3 million of the total allocation for this 
component will be available to Somaliland to implement activities described below to increase access of 
disadvantaged children to education opportunities in the targeted districts in Somaliland. In case these 
funds are not accessed by the time of the Project's midterm review, they will be canceled. 
 
41. 
The Project will follow two complementary approaches for rapidly expanding access to primary 
education in the targeted districts. (1) In selected localities within the targeted districts where nonstate 
providers are active, operators of these nonstate schools will be incentivized to expand their schools' 
capacity to enroll additional children free of cost. (2) In localities within these districts in which there are 
no education providers, new schools will be established in partnership with communities. These 
approaches are described in greater detail below. This dual approach will allow for rapid evaluation of 
effectiveness of each strategy and flexibility to channel funding to the approach that proves to be more 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 104  
     
 
cost effective and operationally viable. This is deemed especially important in Somalia’s context where 
there are large variations between the different areas of the country and inadequate evidence on 
workable solutions. Multiple strategies may be needed to fill the access gap in this context to ensure 
equitable access to services. While nonstate providers are present in some parts, there are many localities 
across the country where nonstate providers may not be a viable option. The following common principles 
will apply to both approaches. 
 
• 
Focus on girls. Both approaches will prioritize enrollment of girls through promotion of recruitment 
of female teachers, ensuring provision of adequate WASH facilities and safe learning environments, 
reducing distance to schools for girls by enabling them to enroll in the school closest to them or placing 
schools close to currently unserved communities, providing additional incentives to nonstate 
providers for enrolling girls and ensuring part of the grants provided to schools are used for facilitating 
girls’ retention such as provision of sanitary napkins. Awareness raising for communities will be 
undertaken to encourage more girls to enroll in schools and complete schooling. 
 
• 
Coordinating with existing demand-side initiatives. The Project will create linkages with ongoing 
demand-side interventions in the country such as the cash transfers provided under the Baxnaano 
program supported by SNHCP and WFP nutrition interventions to ensure a holistic approach to human 
capital development. Project target districts have been selected with the availability of these 
programs as a key consideration. Linking up with these ongoing complementary interventions will 
ensure that children have the required support to attend school and learn.  
 
• 
Engaging communities. This component will leverage the high level of community involvement in 
education provision present across Somalia today. Experience of other DPs in Somalia, especially the 
Girls’ Education Challenge supported by United Kingdom’s Foreign, Commonwealth and Development 
Office (FCDO), shows that engaging community heads can be an effective way of encouraging girls to 
participate in schooling. Globally and especially in FCV contexts, involvement of communities has 
been demonstrated as an effective mechanism for introducing accountability and improving quality 
of service delivery. Entrenching a strong role for communities in monitoring of education delivery will 
also be a key pillar for building a strong system in the country. 
 
• 
Focus on quality. For both interventions, there will be focus on ensuring provision of quality 
education. For new schools, a basic package of support to ensure quality of provision which includes, 
adequate numbers of trained teachers, school grants to meet recurrent expenditures and safe and 
conducive learning environments, which include adequate WASH facilities, will be provided. For 
nonstate schools to become partners in the incentive program (described below) and be eligible for 
support under the Project, they will be required to meet specified minimum quality standards.  
 
(1) Regulating and incentivizing nonstate schools 
 
42. 
The Project will support establishment and management of a Nonstate Schools Incentive 
Program (NSIP) that will incentivize eligible nonstate schools in the targeted districts to enroll additional 
out-of-school girls and boys free of fees.31 Partner schools will be selected following a transparent process 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 104  
     
 
that will assess potential schools against objective criteria. For a school to be eligible to join NSIP, it will 
need to demonstrate substantial compliance with a basic standards checklist. These basic standards 
include aspects related to school registration, administration and governance including involvement of 
CECs, school learning environment including student-classroom ratios to avoid overcrowding, availability 
of adequate numbers of functioning WASH facilities, fiduciary arrangements, school safety, child 
protection, proportion of female teachers and conditions for teaching, learning and monitoring. 
Participating schools will receive a per child subsidy for enrolling each additional out-of-school child 
enrolled in primary school. A key requirement of the program will be enrollment of at least 50 percent 
female students. The subsidy amount for a girl will be set at a higher rate to incentivize enrollment of girls. 
A further eligibility requirement for schools is zero fees for targeted beneficiaries. Student beneficiaries 
will be selected by the FMS from the most disadvantaged households such as beneficiaries of SNHCP. By 
the final year of project implementation, it is expected that 500 private schools will be participating in 
NSIP, meeting the basic standards and other eligibility conditions, and providing education to an 
additional 40,000 disadvantaged primary school students, with girls comprising at least 50 percent of 
these new enrollments. 
 
43. 
Technical Assistance (TA) to the FMS will be a key part of implementation of NSIP. To support 
the implementation of NSIP, technical assistance will be included in this subcomponent to help design and 
manage NSIP and provide capacity enhancement support to strengthen contract management and 
nonstate school supervision services. In addition, the MoECHE will hire an independent program evaluator 
to conduct formative and summative evaluations of the Program. These services are estimated to cost 
US$0.5 million.   
 
(2) New schools to expand access to quality schooling for disadvantaged communities  
 
44. 
The Project will finance the establishment of new schools with basic packages to ensure quality 
provision of education in localities that are currently unserved. This package will include learning-
conducive facilities, teachers, school grants to meet recurrent expenditures, and support for 
strengthening school level management through CECs. The new schools are expected to enroll an 
additional 60,000 out-of-school children.32 
 
• 
School location planning. Beneficiary communities will be selected based on the findings of the needs 
survey. Communities that have large numbers of primary-aged girls and boys that do not have a school 
(public or nonstate) within a 30-minute walk will be prioritized. The survey will assess land tenure, 
environmental and security factors and community support for new schools and will determine the 
size of the school to be built (number of classrooms). Safe school sites within communities will be 
identified through participatory risk assessments which will include community-based organizations 
and locational analysis based on hazard risk mapping. 
 
• 
Community mobilization. Communities will be mobilized and supported to play a role in the 
placement, construction and management of the new schools. Their role will include: (i) selecting a 
Community Education Committee (CEC) for the school that will be responsible for day-to-day 
supervision of the school, including of decision-making on school management related issues and 
 
32 This is an estimate and may change based on findings of a survey that will assess need for new schools. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 104  
     
 
monitoring teacher attendance in line with government’s policy on CECs; (ii) enrolling students 
including meeting minimum targets for girls enrollment and following up on steps to reduce drop-
outs; (iii) identifying potential teachers from their communities, with preference for female teachers; 
(iv) locating and arranging sites for schools and maintenance of school facilities; and (v) submitting 
periodic reports, including via a mobile app when possible, to District Education Officers on student, 
teacher, and school matters. 
 
• 
School construction. New schools with a proportional allocation of gender-separated washrooms and 
water delivery points for each school will be constructed. Water recycling and harvesting will be used 
to the extent possible to meet school needs. Construction specifications for the new classrooms and 
schools33 will conform to the government’s school prototypes, align with agreed standards (safe, 
inclusive, resilient, and climate-smart), and incorporate a modular approach as appropriate to suit 
local needs so as to ensure optimal coverage and minimal distances for children to travel. The 
MoECHE, with the support of its construction supervision contractor, will establish guidelines for 
phasing in the construction and opening of the schools over five years. All new schools will be provided 
with furniture for students, teachers, and administrators, as well as a core set of equipment for 
teaching and learning. 
 
• 
Teacher recruitment. An estimated 750 qualified teachers will be hired to provide instruction at the 
new schools. As these schools are expected to operate at full capacity across two shifts, teachers will 
be contracted to teach in both shifts and will be compensated with a 50 percent salary bonus on top 
of their base salary to teach the second shift. The education authorities of the FMS will hire teachers 
following a transparent, merit-based selection process and manage the teachers for these new 
schools in their respective jurisdictions. Each FMS will be responsible for articulating and 
implementing procedures for merit-based teacher recruitment, contracting, remuneration, and 
supervision in accordance with the forthcoming National Teacher Policy Document, and leveraging 
the payroll systems developed and implemented under the RCRF Project. Special provisions will be 
established to ensure the recruitment of female teachers, especially those from within the local 
community. Experience with prioritized recruitment of women teachers in project-supported schools 
will be used to inform the development of the national teacher policy framework. CECs will participate 
in teacher recruitment and attendance monitoring in accordance with the MoECHE’s Community 
Engagement Policy. 
 
• 
Teacher salaries.  The Project and the FMS governments will co-finance, in equal shares, the salaries 
of these newly hired teachers during project implementation. Simple technology, including SMS 
surveys, will be used to collect information from teachers and full payment of their salaries on a 
monthly basis. SMS surveys of communities will promote accountability of the teachers. Component 
3 will support training and ongoing coaching and support for these new teachers using blended 
approaches.  
 
• 
School grants. The Project will finance school grants to enable the newly constructed schools to meet 
recurrent expenditures to ensure conducive learning environments of schools and to ensure that 
these schools will not impose fees on disadvantaged children that could inhibit their enrollment and 
 
33 Approximately 188 new primary schools, providing altogether 750 classrooms. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 104  
     
 
attendance, particularly those from minority and under-represented groups and those living with 
disabilities. One key objective of the grants will be to promote girls’ enrollment and retention through 
measures that would enable greater female participation in education such as through provision of 
sanitary napkins. The school grants will help schools finance recurrent expenditures related to 
teaching and learning materials, school maintenance, connectivity costs and other goods and services 
identified at the school level, including by the community, needed to support teaching and learning. 
The FMS will have the responsibility to support and facilitate the payment of school grants to the 
schools. FMS support will include: (i) establishment and training of CECs; (ii) guidance for schools to 
develop learning enhancement plans; and (iii) disbursement of the grants. Moreover, the FMS would 
be responsible for fiduciary oversight of the school grants. In addition, the FGS will also have a role in 
supervising the school grants including periodic inspection activities to verify the accuracy of the 
reported enrollments and adherence with the School Grants Guidelines.  
 
45. 
The proposed activities will be carried out with the aim of bolstering long-term resilience to 
risks posed by natural events and disasters, climate change, and health shocks. Natural disasters, 
including those made more frequent by climate change, present widespread and increasing risks to school 
infrastructure and the school community. COVID-19 has highlighted the need to ensure access and 
provision of WASH facilities within schools.34 To reduce the risk of adverse impact of climate change on 
school infrastructure, the Project will provide technical assistance to integrate climate change adaptation 
and risk reduction approaches into the engineering and architectural planning for construction and the 
related engineering and architectural specifications. In addition, training and awareness programs will be 
provided to government construction oversite officers to reduce climate-associated risks before and 
during construction and over the lifetime of the infrastructure. The Project will include mechanisms to 
allow the government to efficiently respond to disasters or crises, which will also contribute to building 
resilience to climate change.  
 
Component 3: Enhanced instruction quality (US$10 million) 
 
46. 
Improving the capacity of Somalia’s teachers is central to enhancing learning outcomes of its 
students. However, implementing an effective, large-scale, teacher professional development program 
(TPDP) and creating the building blocks for a sustainable professional development system in Somalia is 
complex. Traditional training programs that rely on face-to-face instruction are impractical due to the 
large numbers to be trained and the need to pull teachers out of the classroom for extended periods of 
time in a context where there is already very limited teaching and learning taking place. The risks 
associated with movement which have been compounded by restrictions imposed due to the COVID-19 
pandemic, such as curfews and school closures pose additional challenges. Cognizant of these 
complexities in Somalia, this component will lay the foundations for a robust teacher professional 
development ecosystem by supporting the development of a high-quality, sustainable, blended TPDP that 
leverages the high level of mobile connectivity in the country for continuous professional development of 
teachers.   
 
34 Nearly 40 million children worldwide have their education interrupted by natural disasters and disease outbreaks (a number 
that reached 1.6 billion because of the COVID-19 pandemic). Investing in infrastructure resilience efficiently is an imperative in 
a budget-constrained environment. See the following reports for more information: 2018. Safe Schools: The Hidden Crisis. A 
Framework for Action to Deliver Safe, Non-violent, Inclusive, and Effective Learning Environments. Allenby, Brad, Mikhail V. 
Chester, and Thaddeus Miller. 2020. What COVID-19 Has Taught Us About Our Infrastructure. ASCE News, April 14, 2020.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 104  
     
 
47. 
The component will develop a 2-year TPDP that will be delivered using a blended learning 
approach and will support 6,000 teachers to complete the program. Activities will include the design, 
development, testing, refinement and large-scale implementation of the TPDP. This will include the 
creation of a web-based digital platform (with offline functionality to enable trainees to continue working 
on the program when not connected to the internet), which will be used to support remote teacher 
professional development. The component will be led by Somali National University (SNU) with support 
from MoECHE and technical assistance financed by the Project. The component will support initial 
development of the TPDP, including: defining learning outcomes and associated course 
structures/learning pathways for different kinds of teachers; developing and testing a TPDP blended 
learning design and teaching and learning methods; creating individual course frameworks and identifying 
the content to be covered in each course; developing and refining course content and materials; creating 
a contextually suitable trainee support system; designing an assessment strategy for the program as a 
whole as well as for individual courses; and identifying and deploying an online platform to deliver the 
digital component of the program. The Learning Management System will be intended both for use in this 
program and for further development of pre-service and in-service teacher training courses and programs. 
Once the program has been developed and approved, the component will support the roll out of the TPDP 
to 6,000 teachers over the course of three years in three cohorts of 2,000 teachers each. Implementation 
of the TPDP will also be led by SNU in coordination with FMS level Teacher Training Institutes, with support 
from MoECHE and technical assistance financed by the Project. This phase will include identifying teachers 
to participate in the TPDP, providing materials and content (incorporating judicious use of scripted lessons 
where appropriate to support teachers in the classroom), deploying support systems, undertaking in-
classroom observations, and conducting formative and summative assessments.  
 
48. 
Acknowledging that the use of blended learning in Somalia is still in its infancy, the component 
will adopt a developmental testing process designed to rapidly gain feedback on the design of the TPDP 
and use this to inform implementation refinements. This is designed to mitigate the current lack of 
understanding regarding the combinations of teaching strategies and technological tools that might work 
effectively in the Somali context. Testing processes will be designed to support decisions about which 
combinations of technology, content packaging, student support, and assessment approaches will work 
best in Somalia. This approach will impact the component in two ways. First, it means that the design and 
implementation of the program will be subject to regular, ongoing monitoring that will lead to continued 
refinement over program implementation to ensure it meets the needs of Somali teachers. Second, the 
specific educational, content, technological, and support approaches for the program will not be pre-
determined but rather defined through a series of cycles of program development in which options are 
tested for efficacy before they are rolled out at scale. This will be confirmed throughout the TPDP design 
process, drawing on international best practices and lessons in equivalent contexts and underpinned by 
field testing and research undertaken with teachers in Somalia. Virtual approaches have the advantage of 
overcoming the challenges of remoteness and insecurity as well as observing social distancing protocols 
necessitated by COVID-19 and overcoming some of the barriers for teachers and pupils living with 
disabilities, particularly when supported with assisted devices where necessary. 
 
49. 
The program design and focus will build on insights generated from a GPE-funded project aiming 
to provide rapid upskilling to 2,000 early grade teachers in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. This 
GPE-funded project, which will be delivered by SNU in collaboration with Care International through a 
tablet-based approach, is expected to commence delivery in 2021 and will yield insights that can inform 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 104  
     
 
the design of the longer-term approach and systems being developed under the proposed Project.  
 
50. 
Beyond its impact on education quality, the TPDP has been designed to ensure alignment with 
both social and environmental considerations in Somalia. Considerations are linked to both program 
design/administration and program content. In relation to program design and administration, equity in 
access to the TPDP for various historically marginalized groups will be prioritized for females, teachers 
with disabilities and teachers from marginalized communities. With respect to program design and 
administration, MoECHE will ensure that climate/green standards are integrated into procurement, an 
important step given the focus on technology in this program. In relation to content, the TPDP will help 
to foster positive social and environmental change. The content of the TPDP will be designed to raise 
awareness about issues including gender equity, fostering positive environmental behaviors, climate 
change, and other subjects prioritized by the MoECHE and SNU. 
 
51. 
Technical assistance will be a key part of TPDP development and implementation. A key 
objective of the TA will be to build capacity of SNU and MoECHE staff in relevant areas to ensure sustained, 
high-quality implementation of the program. Specifically, the TA will support: (i) curriculum design and 
review; (ii) assessment of available existing materials and gap analysis to determine materials 
development requirements; (iii) design of content treatment strategy for all media types and content 
development plan; (iv) initial preparation of materials; (v) design of student support approach and 
systems; (vi) functional specification development for online technology platforms; (vii) iterative 
evaluation of TPDP; and (viii) assessment of institutional, personnel and system capacity needs of SNU 
and MoECHE to implement the TPDP and development and implementation of a capacity building plan. 
 
Component 4: Project management (US$3 million equivalent) 
 
52. 
Current capacity at all administrative levels, FGS, FMS levels, regional and district levels is weak. 
The proposed Project will likely be the largest investment managed directly by MoECHE and investments 
are required for staffing key positions to deliver the Project successfully. At the same time, given the 
federal structure under which the Project will be implemented, adequate support at the FMS and district 
level will also be needed to ensure project financing is used in a credible manner and managed efficiently. 
The Project will thus finance key project staff at the FGS level including a project director for overall 
management, project coordinator to work closely with the various implementing entities, monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E), fiduciary and environmental and social risks management staff. Funds will also be 
provided for refurbishment, office equipment and furniture to adequately resource project staff to 
manage implementation. Project staff will also be hired at the FMS level to manage activities at that level 
and regularly supervise project activities. More details are provided in Annex 1 as part of implementing 
arrangements.  
 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
 
53. 
The Project is expected to benefit students, teachers and communities across Somalia from 
improved system performance, increased opportunities for schooling, a greater focus on learning 
outcomes and improved quality of instruction. During the implementation period, direct benefits will 
accrue to approximately 100,000 primary school-aged students in the 14 targeted districts, at least 50 
percent of whom will be girls. These students are expected to benefit from schools in closer proximity to 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 104  
     
 
their homes that provide quality education. The Project targets the areas with the lowest access rates to 
maximize benefits from investments. Component 2 will directly benefit these students through 
establishment of new schools, provision of teachers and school grants for teaching learning materials, and 
support for poor households to send their children to nonstate schools free of charge. In addition, a total 
of 6,000 teachers are expected to directly benefit from professional development through the TPDP 
blended training program. Ministry of Education officials at the Federal and FMS level are expected to 
benefit from capacity building efforts of the Project.  
 
D. Results Chain 
 
54. 
The Project provides an essential package of support for increased access to quality education 
in underserved areas of the country while ensuring that this happens within a coherent framework for 
education development to support institutional strengthening and ensure sustainability. With among 
the lowest rates of enrollment in the world, Somalia faces significant challenges in creating equal and 
quality schooling opportunities for its children. The Project aims to provide new schools in selected 
localities where children do not currently have access to schooling while ensuring that the education 
provided is of good quality that leads to learning. Where schools do exist, the Project aims to provide 
mechanisms for those excluded due to their inability to pay school fees to access these schools through 
partnerships. It puts equal focus on ensuring that the quality of education provided is high by focusing on 
making teachers more effective. The Project recognizes that sustainability of outcomes can only be 
achieved when underpinned by a functioning system that collects and makes decisions based on reliable 
data and formulates strong policies that can help it achieve its outcomes of interest. This package of 
support is expected to directly lead to new functional schools that have conducive learning environments, 
improved capacity of teachers, and a stronger system, and indirectly show pathways for further cost-
effective expansion of quality schooling and increased levels of learning. The results chain for the Project 
is depicted in Figure 4.   
 
A. Rationale for World Bank Involvement and the Role of Partners 
 
55. 
The value added from the World Bank’s support derives from several aspects. (1) The World 
Bank is providing support to Somalia within the framework of overall human capital development of the 
country. Complementary projects that focus on improving human development are either under 
implementation (SNHCP) or under preparation (Improving Healthcare Services in Somalia Project, 
P172031). Together these investments have the potential to provide coordinated support for human 
capital formation in Somalia. (2) The World Bank’s support in improving governance and public financial 
management of the sector also places the World Bank in a unique position to further fortify the education 
sector. The World Bank has been providing support to Somalia through the RCRF project to introduce 
reforms to help FGS and FMS education ministries strengthen their core systems for the delivery and 
management of education services. This includes financing of teacher salaries and other recurrent 
expenses, establishing payroll systems, proficiency testing of teachers and a school supervision and 
accountability mechanism, along with support for better budget planning and execution. Importantly, the 
foundation for an inter-governmental financing framework to enable FGS to FMS budgetary transfers has 
been established under RCRF, which has prepared the groundwork for the education project to build on 
and institutionalize the systems as a next step of Somalia’s journey to re-establishing its systems. (3) 
Extensive analytical work on system building of the education sector in Somalia, including a research study 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 104  
     
 
on the nonstate sector and assessment of monitoring and evaluation systems and a policy lessons paper 
on the division of roles and responsibilities in federal education systems elsewhere in the world have 
provided a solid knowledge base to provide needed technical assistance and guidance for the design and 
implementation of the Project. (4) Global knowledge and technical expertise in the relevant thematic 
areas of education, including learning assessments, teacher training and management, education 
technology and innovation and public private partnerships enable the World Bank to provide significant 
contributions to Somalia as it rebuilds its education system. 
 
Figure 4: Results Chain 
 
 
School grants 
Partnership program 
with nonstate schools 
Improved 
learning 
environment of 
schools with 
adequate 
facilities for girls 
Improved 
classroom 
instruction 
quality 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 104  
     
 
Role of partners 
 
56. 
DPs play a significant role in the Somalia education landscape. Nearly all funding for education 
in Somalia today is provided by a variety of external partners, including multilaterals, bilateral partners, 
international nongovernment organizations (INGOs), philanthropies, and Somali diaspora. Bilateral 
partners including United States Agency for International Development (USAID), Canada and FCDO and 
multilateral agencies such as the Education Cannot Wait, European Union (EU), GPE, the World Bank, and 
the UN constituent agencies, specifically UNICEF, provide financial support, capacity-building, and 
strategic direction. INGOs, the two most active of which are CARE International and Save the Children, 
often serve as implementing partners for grants to the education sector (especially for GPE grants) with 
direct execution of activities. Partner support also takes other forms such as training of MoECHE staff, 
support for important meetings such as the Annual Joint Reviews as well as providing technical support 
to key ministry functions through the financing of Technical Advisors. Although the federal government 
has set up mechanisms and processes to establish dialogue with partners and coordinate DP programs, it 
has not yet managed to ensure that these funding flows reinforce efforts to strengthen Somalia’s evolving 
federal education system structure or align efficiently with Somalia’s education system objectives of 
increasing access, equity, and quality of schooling across the country. The Project proposes to build 
MoECHE’s capacity to play a stronger role in coordinating and aligning DP support to its education goals 
through Component 1 of the Project.  
 
57. 
The proposed Project is aligned with and incorporates lessons learnt from various DPs 
interventions in Somalia. First, it derives key lessons from UNICEF’s Go-to-School flagship program that 
highlights the needs of lagging groups with a focus on girls and domestic financing of education through 
greater allocations of the national budgets to the education sector.35 The Safe School designs developed 
by UNICEF will be used for expansion of school infrastructure under Component 2. On measurement of 
student learning, the Project builds on lessons learned from the pilot of the EGRA implemented in 
Mogadishu between 2013-15 by Concern Worldwide. The schools included in the assessment 
demonstrated significant improvement in the reading levels of both boys and girls in targeted schools. 
The Project also draws on lessons from FCDO’s Somalia Girls Education Challenge (GEC) project to 
promote girls’ inclusion in schooling and complements GPE efforts in the sector including establishment 
of schools in partnership with communities and with a focus on teacher capacity development.  
 
B. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
 
58. 
The World Bank’s FCV strategy (2020-2025) provides several lessons which have informed 
project design. An important lesson incorporated is on the importance of strengthening the legitimacy 
and capacity of core institutions. The Project puts emphasis on building the capacity of government 
institutions to engage with subnational levels and a range of stakeholders to improve consultation and 
trust between the different tiers of government. It also incorporates lessons around involvement of local 
stakeholders in implementation by supporting member state and district authorities to collaborate with 
communities, for example with CECs, to empower them and give them a voice in managing services 
provided by the government. 
 
 
35 UNICEF education strategy (2018-2020) 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 104  
     
 
59. 
Project design recognizes that the private sector lies at the center of sustainable development 
models in FCV settings. This is emphasized by the FCV strategy as well as experience from FCV contexts 
around the world. Programs that establish public private partnerships to cost effectively and rapidly 
expand access to education have been successful in countries such as Pakistan. The Project tests a similar 
approach to partnering with nonstate education providers in Somalia by leveraging the potential of the 
private sector to contribute to improvements in education outcomes by making it pro-poor. 
 
60. 
Improving the quality of teachers can have large impacts on learning. Recent evidence has 
quantified the impact of a good teacher on learning with the effect of a good teacher estimated to 
represent anywhere between one and three full additional years of learning for children (World Bank, 
2018). Based on this strong evidence base, the Project focuses on improving the quality of teachers in 
Somalia to ensure learning takes place in its schools.  
 
61. 
Implementation experience of RCRF, especially on components that supported the education 
sector, have been incorporated in project design. One key lesson was on emphasizing greater 
collaboration between the federal government and member states. Creating a platform for continuous 
consultation and joint decision-making has been important for implementation, lack of which has stalled 
implementation in the past. Project implementation arrangements have been established to provide 
formal platforms for the FGS and FMS to discuss project progress and challenges and reach decisions 
collaboratively. 
 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
62. 
The Project will be implemented by the FGS Ministry of Education, Culture and Higher Education 
and the FMS and Somaliland Ministries of Education. The federal MoECHE will be responsible for 
coordination of all project activities and overall reporting on project progress and performance. Overall 
project leadership will be provided by the Project Steering Committee (PSC). The PSC will be headed by 
the FGS Minister of Education, Culture and Higher Education and include the FMS Ministers of Education, 
one representative from the ESC coordination body and one community representative. The PSC will 
provide strategic direction and guidance on high-level risk management and decision-making on project 
objectives. This inclusive body will be crucial for promoting dialogue, consensus-building and joint 
decision-making on key aspects of the education system. A Program Management Committee (PMC) 
headed by the Director General (DG), Federal MoECHE and including DGs from all the participating FMS 
will provide technical leadership for project implementation. The PMC will also include heads of relevant 
MoECHE departments and the Project Management Unit (PMU) Director. Key responsibilities of the PMC 
include (a) establishing a platform for collaboration, management, troubleshooting and technical support 
for implementation of the Project.  
 
63. 
Day-to-day implementation of the Project will be undertaken by a dedicated PMU at the FGS 
level and lean Project Implementation Units (PIUs) at the FMS level and Somaliland. The PMU will be 
headed by a Project Director and include experts to manage key functions including financial 
management, procurement, environment and social (E&S) risk management, Gender Based Violence 
(GBV) expert and M&E. In addition to responsibility for implementation of Components 1, 3 and 4, the 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 of 104  
     
 
PMU will also be responsible for coordinating project activities with the implementing partners and the 
FMS. It will arrange quarterly reviews of project implementation, consolidate reports from the FMS on 
Component 2 activities and report overall project progress and performance. The FMS and Somaliland 
PIUs will be responsible for implementation and monitoring of Component 2 activities for their respective 
jurisdictions as agreed in the MoU on functional assignments between FGS and FMS. They will comprise 
of coordinators, procurement, social development and monitoring staff. Functions related to financial 
management (FM) at the FMS level and Somaliland will be implemented jointly under the common 
approach using arrangements established under RCRF and other World Bank-supported projects.   
 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
 
64. 
M&E arrangements. The overall project monitoring responsibility will lie with the PMU in 
coordination with the FMS PIUs. Somaliland will report separately. An M&E officer will be hired as a core 
part of the PMU team to manage monitoring, reporting and evaluation planned under the Project. The 
M&E officer will work closely with the FMS implementation teams to support monitoring and reporting 
of project outputs and outcomes. The results framework of the Project (Section VII) provides details of 
the indicators for which data will be collected and reported and the overall responsibility for data 
collection for the various indicators.  
 
65. 
The PMU in coordination with FMS implementation teams will have overall project monitoring 
responsibilities. Specific activities include (a) regular supervision of project implementation sites; (b) 
preparing biannual implementation progress reports by compiling implementation reports from various 
implementing units, which would include the progress toward PDOs through reporting of key 
performance indicators; (c) carrying out assessment and evaluation studies; and (e) conducting citizens’ 
engagement surveys for ensuring beneficiaries’ and communities’ feedback in improving project 
performance. TA support will be available to the PMU for carrying out the listed M&E activities through 
subcomponent 1.3 of the Project.  
 
66. 
Simple and low-cost ICT tools will be used for M&E and remote supervision of the Project given 
the highly fragile and conflict-affected operating environment which may lead to constraints on access 
to project sites on the ground due to security-related and/or logistical reasons. The Project will focus on 
building capacity of the government to use these tools for their day-to-day monitoring and supervision of 
the Project. The Geo-Enabled Initiative for Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS) will be utilized to build 
capacity of government counterparts to use open source tools for in-field collection of structured digital 
data that automatically feeds into a centralized M&E system. The integrated data collected can include 
photos, audio, videos; time and date stamps; and GPS coordinates that allow for automated geo-mapping 
of the information. This can also provide a platform for remote supervision and real-time risk monitoring 
of project activities.  
 
67. 
In Somalia, non-smart phone use is more prevalent, so data collection mechanisms will ensure 
they are well-suited for non-smart phones. SMS has been used in Somalia by UNICEF in the m-WASH 
project that makes use of basic mobile devices to deliver health information.36  For the Project, call agent-
 
36 https://www.unicef.org/esaro/UNICEF-FN-Somalia-Mobile-low-res.pdf  
https://oxfamilibrary.openrepository.com/bitstream/handle/10546/552890/er-using-mobile-phone-polio-prevention-somalia-
200515-en.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Education for Human Capital Development Project (P172434) 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 of 104  
     
 
based, WhatsApp business solutions, and SMS surveys, wherever appropriate, will be used when engaging 
with and SMS surveys will be used when collecting data from school principals, teachers, parents and 
CECs. Project monitoring officers will use tablet devices for data collection when in the field, e.g. when 
visiting new schools being built or meeting with existing schools and communities. These devices should 
allow for data storage with upload to the integrated monitoring system (see below) taking place when 
connectivity is available.  
 
68. 
Technology will also be used to assist with data verification processes. Some data verification 
will be done by project monitoring officers when they are in the field (see above). Spending reported by 
participants will be verified through an independent audit of MoECHE accounts. Indicators that are 
reported by schools will be verified by cross referencing with EMIS data. Effective verification thus 
depends on the quality of EMIS data available which will be strengthened with support from component 
1 of the Project. SNU student record keeping via the institutional management information system will be 
triangulated with participant data to verify numbers of teachers trained.  
 
69. 
The Project will invest in an integrated system for the management and analysis of data 
collected through various channels for effective monitoring. The integrated monitoring system will be 
designed to capture the data needed to report across all the indicators outlined in the Results Framework. 
This system will incorporate capacities for data importing, either manually or directly via online survey 
and/or SMS survey platforms, EMIS data and SNU data. Data collected on mobile devices by project 
monitoring officers or from the communities will also be uploaded to the system. The recently passed 
data protection policy of FGS will guide management of beneficiary data and data protection. The Project 
will build government capacity related to hardware, software, regulatory framework, data management 
protocols, data protection guidelines, and organizational capacity to ensure protection of beneficiary 
data. Putting in place an integrated monitoring system will provide a strong basis for ongoing learning 
based on emerging findings and will also streamline processes of independent data verification by third 
parties such as external evaluators.  
 
C. Sustainability 
 
70. 
Attention to sustainability is a cornerstone of project design. First, the Project objectives and 
activities are fully aligned with Somalia’s education sector strategy and directly support key pillars of the 
ESSP 2018-2020. Second, the Project puts emphasis on building systems and institutions in all aspects of 
project implementation. The Project will not only support development and/or finalization of government 
policies but will also support implementation of these through project financing. As an example, 
government policy frameworks around teacher management, community education committees, and 
regulation of the nonstate sector will formally guide project implementation at the FMS, region, district 
and school levels. Use of government policies is expected to promote their use beyond project 
interventions as well and contribute to building a coherent system to deliver education.  Third, there is 
emphasis on building consensus with the various stakeholders on all policy development to promote use 
of unified policies and standards across the country. Financing has been allocated to help the federal 
government build this stewardship role which is expected to reduce the current fragmentation across the 
system and improve coordination among the different st