 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD4464  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT 
ON A 
 
PROPOSED GRANT 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 43.9 MILLION  
(US$58 MILLION EQUIVALENT)  
 
AND  
 
 A GRANT 
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$5 MILLION 
FROM THE HORN OF AFRICA MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND 
 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
 
FOR THE 
 
SOMALIA - HORN OF AFRICA INFRASTRUCTURE INTEGRATION PROJECT (SHIIP) 
 
September 9, 2022 
 
 
Transport Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
 
 
 
 
 
   
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective July 31, 2022) 
 
Currency Unit =   SDR 
SDR 0.7555 = 
US$1 
US$1.3236 = SDR 1 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
July 1 - June 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Victoria Kwakwa 
Country Director: Boutheina Guermazi  
Regional Director: Wendy Hughes 
Practice Manager: Almud Weitz 
Task Team Leaders: Adam Diehl, Gylfi Palsson, Susan Owuor 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
 
AfDB 
African Development Bank 
COVID-19 
Coronavirus Disease 2019 
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework  
DP 
Development Partner 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section  
EAs 
Environmental Audits 
EU 
European Union 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMS 
Federal Member States 
GBV 
Gender Based Violence 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Services 
HoA 
Horn of Africa 
IBRD 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
ICT 
Information Communications and Technology 
IDA 
International Development Association 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
IGAD 
Intergovernmental Authority on Development 
IPF 
Investment Project Financing 
MFMR 
Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources 
MCI 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
MCT 
Ministry for Communication and Technology  
MDTF 
Multi-Donor Trust Fund 
MECC 
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change 
MEWR 
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources  
MoF 
Ministry of Finance 
MPMT 
Ministry of Ports and Marine Transport 
MPWRH 
Ministry of Public Works, Reconstruction and Housing  
MTCA 
Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation 
NAPA 
National Adaptation Program of Action 
NDC 
Nationally Determined Contribution  
NDP 
National Development Plan 
OPM 
Office of Prime Minister Federal Republic of Somalia 
PBC 
Performance Based Contracts 
PCU 
Project Coordination Unit 
PDO 
Project Development Objectives  
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development 
SCD 
Systematic Country Diagnostic  
SDR 
Special Drawing Rights 
 
 
 
SEA 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
SHIIP 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project 
SOP 
Series of Projects 
SORT 
Systematic Operations Risk Rating Tool  
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
ToR 
Terms of Reference 
US$ 
United States Dollar 
WBG 
World Bank Group 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (P173119) 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... 1 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 7 
A. Regional and Country Context .......................................................................................................... 7 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................. 13 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ............................................................................................. 21 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 23 
A. Project Development Objective ..................................................................................................... 23 
B. Project Components ....................................................................................................................... 24 
C. Project Beneficiaries ....................................................................................................................... 29 
D. Results Chain .................................................................................................................................. 30 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners ................................................................... 33 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design .................................................................... 33 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................ 34 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 34 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements......................................................................... 35 
C. Sustainability ................................................................................................................................... 35 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 37 
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ................................................................................... 37 
B. Fiduciary .......................................................................................................................................... 40 
C. Legal Operational Policies ............................................................................................................... 42 
D. Environmental and Social ............................................................................................................... 42 
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES ..................................................................................... 46 
VI. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 46 
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 48 
ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan .......................................... 57 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (P173119) 
 
 
 
     
Page 1 of 66 
 
 
      
DATASHEET 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 
 BASIC INFO TABLE 
Country(ies) 
Project Name 
Horn of Africa, Somalia 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
P173119 
Investment Project 
Financing 
High 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component  (CERC) 
[✓] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict  
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Enhanced Implementation Support (HEIS) 
 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
30-Sep-2022 
30-Sep-2026 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
No 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to prepare a spatially coordinated investment pipeline of economic corridor 
projects, and to strengthen the national government’s management of selected sectors. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 66 
     
 
 
Components 
 
Component Name  
Cost (US$, millions) 
 
Development of Regional Economic Corridors  
  30.00 
 
Connectivity to Economic Corridors  
  18.00 
 
Institutional and Capacity Development  
   7.80 
 
Project Management  
   7.20 
 
Contingent Emergency Response Component  
   0.00 
 
 
Organizations 
 
Borrower:  
 Ministry of Finance, Federal Republic of Somalia  
Implementing Agency: 
 Ministry of Public Works, Reconstruction and Housing  
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
Total Project Cost 
63.00 
Total Financing 
63.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
58.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILS-NewFinEnh1 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
58.00 
          IDA Grant 
58.00 
Non-World Bank Group Financing 
     Trust Funds 
5.00 
          Horn of Africa Initiative Umbrella Trust Fund 
5.00 
 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 66 
     
 
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Guarantee Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
   0.00 
  58.00 
   0.00 
  58.00 
National PBA 
   0.00 
  38.00 
   0.00 
  38.00 
Regional 
   0.00 
  20.00 
   0.00 
  20.00 
Total 
   0.00 
  58.00 
   0.00 
  58.00 
 
 
 
Expected Disbursements (in US$, Millions) 
 
WB Fiscal Year   
 
 
 
 
 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
2027 
Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
   5.00 
  15.00 
  20.00 
  15.00 
   3.00 
Cumulative 
 
 
 
 
 
   5.00 
  20.00 
  40.00 
  55.00 
  58.00 
  
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Transport 
Digital Development, Energy & Extractives, Environment, 
Natural Resources & the Blue Economy, Macroeconomics, 
Trade and Investment 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
⚫ High 
2. Macroeconomic 
⚫ Moderate 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ Moderate 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ Moderate 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
⚫ Substantial 
6. Fiduciary 
⚫ High 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 66 
     
 
7. Environment and Social 
⚫ High 
8. Stakeholders 
⚫ Substantial 
9. Other 
 
10. Overall 
⚫ Substantial 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?  
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 66 
     
 
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
  
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
Legal Covenants 
  
 Sections and Description 
Schedule II, Section I.A.2.a. - Not later than six (6) months after the Effective Date, the Recipient shall recruit the 
following additional staff into the Project Coordination Unit (PCU):  an environmental specialist, a social 
development specialist, a monitoring and evaluation specialist, and a stakeholder engagement specialist, all with 
terms of reference, qualifications, and experience, satisfactory to the Association. 
 
 
 
 
Conditions 
  
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
HOATF Grant Agreement has been executed and delivered and all 
conditions precedent to its effectiveness or to the right of the 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 66 
     
 
Recipient to make withdrawals under it (other than the 
effectiveness of this Agreement) have been fulfilled. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
The Recipient has prepared and adopted, the Project Operations 
Manual, in form and substance satisfactory to the Association. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
The Recipient has recruited and/or seconded to  the Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU), a Project coordinator, a financial 
management specialist and  a procurement specialist, all under 
terms of reference and with qualifications and experience 
satisfactory to the Association. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
The Recipient has established the Project Steering Committee with 
resources, functions, and terms of reference, satisfactory to the 
Association. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Disbursement 
IBRD/IDA 
For Emergency Expenditures under Category (3) until: 
(i)  
(A) the Recipient has determined that an Eligible Crisis or 
Emergency has occurred, and has requested the Association to 
address such Eligible Crisis or Emergency under Part E of the Project 
and in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement; and (B) 
the Association has agreed with such determination, accepted said 
request and notified the Recipient thereof; and 
(ii) 
the Recipient has adopted the CERC Manual and Emergency 
Action Plan, in form and substance acceptable to the Association. 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 66 
 
 
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
 
A. Regional and Country Context 
 
a) Regional Context 
 
1. 
The Horn of Africa (HoA), comprising Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, and Somalia,1 has a total area of 
around 1.7 million km2, a population of about 233 million, and a combined Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
estimated at US$232 billion, as of 2021.2 Approximately 70 percent of the population live in rural areas and exhibit 
high levels of poverty ranging from 69 percent in Somalia to 17 percent in Djibouti (Table 1). The population of 
the region is also growing quickly and is expected to reach 300 million by 2030. 
 
Table 1: Socio-Economic Indicators3 
Country 
Population 
Growth 
(annual %) 
GDP per Capita 
(US$ current 
prices) 
GDP per Capita 
Growth 
(annual %) 
Poverty 
Headcount 
Ratio at 
US$1.9/day (%) 
Human 
Development 
Index (HDI) 
Life expectancy 
at birth (years) 
Djibouti 
1.4 
3,364 
2.8 
17 
.524 
62 
Eritrea 
1.4 
643 
7.2 
N/A 
.459 
66 
Ethiopia 
2.5 
944 
3.0 
30.8 
.485 
67 
Kenya 
2.2 
2,007 
5.1 
37.1 
.601 
67 
Somalia 
2.9 
446 
0.4 
68.6 
.351 
57 
 
2. 
The HoA is a complex region with nearly all countries exhibiting some level of conflict or vulnerability. 
In the Fiscal Year 2023 edition of the global list of fragile and conflict-affected situations countries released by the 
World Bank Group (WBG), both Somalia and Ethiopia are included as conflict affected states, while Eritrea is 
included as a country with institutional and social fragility. A humanitarian crisis is looming in the northern Tigray 
region of Ethiopia due to a protracted political crisis since 2018 which has continued to escalate into violence and 
risks drawing in participants from the wider region. The HoA region exhibits large social, political, and economic 
variations between and within member countries. High poverty levels in the HoA are most prevalent in the 
northern parts of Kenya, Somalia, and Eritrea. Some of the countries suffer from protracted conflict and political 
strife arising from challenges of underdevelopment, resource scarcity, and economic shocks from global economic 
crises and climate challenges.4 
 
3. 
Regional integration through the expansion of transport and trade infrastructure is expected to 
substantially support economic development and structural transformation of the HoA countries. A recent 
 
1 In some contexts, the “Horn of Africa” also includes other countries in the greater region. In this document, the terms “HoA” and “Horn” 
refer only to the countries of Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, and Somalia 
2 World Development Indicators, 2021 
3 World Development Indicators; United Nations (UN Statistics Division; Human Development Index; Horn of Africa Regional Economic 
Memorandum 2021. All data 2021 unless no data is available, in which case the most recent data is used. Poverty estimates are based on 
World Bank calculations and are based on latest available survey data: 2017 for Djibouti; 2015 for Kenya; 2015 for Ethiopia, and 2017 for 
Somalia; Data is unavailable for Eritrea. Life expectancy based on 2020 data, while HDI data is based on 2019, the latest available in both 
cases. 
4 Inter-Governmental Authority on Development regional Strategy, Volume 1: The Framework, January 2016. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 66 
 
 
study5 uses a general equilibrium model to estimate that the implementation of new regional transport corridors 
coupled with effective trade facilitation measures would result in an increase in welfare of 3.9 to 6.3 percent in 
the HoA countries, as measured by percentage change of real income. Somalia would enjoy the largest gains, 
followed by Djibouti, Kenya and Ethiopia. Using reduced-form analysis to understand the relationship between 
past investments in electricity, internet, and road infrastructure and the sectoral structure of employment in 
Ethiopia and Kenya, it is expected that investment in infrastructure would lead to effective structural 
transformation in the region; with having access to electricity at the district level associated with a 6 percentage-
point reduction in the employment share of agriculture and a 4 percentage-point increase in the employment 
share of services while big push investments that combine paved roads and internet are associated with a 12 
percentage-point additional increase in the share of services employment. Due to the prevalence of informal trade 
in the region, it is expected that deeper regional integration coupled with effective trade facilitation measures 
would support sustained growth in trade and investment in all countries in the region. 
 
4. 
Development is lagging in the border regions, where instability as well as economic and physical 
distance from growth centers has created persistent poverty. Forced displacement is common in the region, 
lasting over 20 years in some cases. The concentration of protracted refugees and Internally Displaced Persons is 
one of the highest in the world, with most refugees living in camps situated near the borders of their respective 
countries of origin.6 The livelihoods of these refugees and migrants are often entirely dependent upon cross-
border trade with their communities of origin. These same communities also fail to benefit from strong cross-
border digital infrastructure network links, wireless roaming and quality broadband access, with existing mobile 
broadband coverage primarily concentered in urban hubs. In addition, border regions are characterized by a high 
intensity of agricultural and livestock production and livelihoods are entirely dependent upon the sale and export 
of such goods. Thus, improving connectivity, supporting livelihoods, and building resilience will contribute towards 
creating a sense of belonging, inclusion, sharing of benefits, and greater peace and security.  
 
5. 
The countries of the HoA are currently facing converging crises: The Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) 
pandemic and its resulting economic disruptions, food insecurity due to droughts and locusts, and the spreading 
repercussions of the war in Ukraine. The HoA has had more than 875,000 infections and 14,000 deaths from 
COVID-19 as of July 2022, compared to 11.8 million infections and more than 250,000 deaths for Africa as a 
continent.7 In Somalia, a seemingly low number of cases (26,830) and deaths (1,361)8 may reflect weak testing 
and reporting capacity more than it does actual lower infection rates. While the COVID-19 rates and morbidity 
have begun to decline as of the time of project approval, and its impact on the African economy begun to wain - 
the sharp decline in GDP in 2020 (2.2 percent reduction) was followed by a surprisingly robust recovery in 2021 
(4.5 percent increase), progress has been jeopardized by the Russian invasion of Ukraine which has triggered a 
global economic shock. Surging oil and food prices are straining regional economies and have increased food 
security concerns.9 In the Horn of Africa these COVID-19 and global shocks are compounding already difficult 
challenges resulting from drought and locusts, which have heightened food insecurity and depressed the 
economic output of the agriculture sector which is at the heart of much of the region’s economy.  
 
 
5 “Infrastructure and Structural Change in the Horn of Africa”. World Bank. 2021 
6 Noack, M. Protracted Displacement in the Horn of Africa. 2020. Bonn International Center for Conversion 
7 Africa Center for Disease Control (accessed July 4, 2022). 
8 Ibid. 
9 International Monetary Fund, Regional Economic Outlook Sub-Saharan Africa, April 2022 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 66 
 
 
6. 
The countries10 came together in 2019 to launch the Horn of Africa Initiative, recognizing the need for a 
concerted effort to collectively chart a way forward, based on recent improvements in inter-state relations. 
Leaders of the HoA requested support from the World Bank, African Development Bank (AfDB) and European 
Union (EU) on deepening economic integration. The resulting HoA Initiative consists of a US$15 billion package of 
priorities under four thematic areas: (i) development of regional infrastructure networks covering upgrading of 
economic corridors, energy, and digital connectivity; (ii) trade and economic integration covering trade 
facilitation, regional value chains, and improvements in the investment climate; (iii) resilience building involving 
strengthening of pastoral production systems; and (iv) human capital development, focusing on building skills for 
future employment and empowering women and youth.  
 
7. 
The HoA Initiative offers opportunities to transform the economies of the region, create and diversify 
jobs, reduce poverty, conflicts and inequality, and boost the economic performance of the region. Between 
2014 and 2019, growth in the HoA outpaced growth in Sub-Saharan Africa as a whole, but opportunities to close 
the development gap at a faster pace have been missed due to the low-level of integration and the infrastructure 
challenges that the HoA initiative has been established to tackle. Inter-regional trade  for example is considerably 
below what would be expected based on the economic size and location of the countries.11 Cross border trade 
enhances food security through the movement of grain and other food items from surplus areas to deficit areas 
and by increasing the price incentives to production in those areas where efficiency and yields are highest,12 but 
it is today largely informal and inefficient, due to multiple off-loading and severe non-tariff barriers to trade in the 
transport chains.13 The region is also strategically important from a digital connectivity perspective, given the 
number of international submarine cables landing (current/planned) in coastal cities, including in Djibouti, 
Mogadishu (Somalia) and Mombasa (Kenya). The absence of a well-developed network infrastructure in Somalia 
is preventing it from fully benefitting from this access as well as serving to facilitate digital connectivity to 
landlocked Ethiopia. Due to slow progress in structural transformation, especially in Ethiopia, self-employment 
and unpaid work still account for the bulk of employment in the HoA.14  
 
8. 
While Somalia’s role in realizing the HoA Initiative is key to its success, it faces the biggest challenge 
and the longest road to implementation. As part of the proposed HoA Initiative, Somalia is engaging with its 
neighbors to rebuild links to regional and global economies. Within the HoA Initiative’s infrastructure pillar, 
economic corridor road connections linking to the port cities serving the HoA are high on the agenda (Figure 1). 
The connectivity provided by the regional corridors have the potential of supporting integration on three different 
but complementary levels: (i) regional integration among countries in the HoA, (ii) integration with global markets, 
and (iii) domestic market integration. Despite this potential, Somalia is ill prepared to deliver major regional 
integration infrastructure in the short term due to an absence of the institutions, policy and legal environment, 
and shovel-ready projects needed to plan for and implement infrastructure investments.  
 
9. 
The HoA Initiative has accordingly been designed to support the countries to fully realize their economic 
potential through selective high-impact measures and investments by (i) financing the agreed investment 
priorities where ready, (ii) supporting the development of bankable projects where such investments are not 
 
10 Djibouti, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya, and Somalia.  Sudan joined in May of 2021 but had not been integrated into the HoA Initiative’s 
planning or identified projects as of the time of project preparation. 
11 Horn of Africa Regional Economic Memorandum, 2021.  
12 Ibid.  
13 Some of the challenges in the cross-border movements are analyzed in detail in the analysis of border markets in World Bank. 2021. 
Somalia Country Economic Memorandum: Towards an Inclusive Jobs Agenda  
14 World Bank. Horn of Africa Regional Economic Memorandum, 2021  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 66 
 
 
ready for financing, and (iii) strengthening policy coordination issues amongst the HoA countries. The World Bank 
is actively supporting the countries in all three areas, focusing on areas (ii) and (iii) in Somalia. In the transport 
sector in Somalia, the proposed project is expected to finance the feasibility and design studies for corridor 
investments, as well as building the capacity of the government to plan for and manage such assets. While these 
studies and designs are intended to facilitate future projects, no civil works are planned under the proposed 
project. In other countries, such as Kenya, Djibouti and Ethiopia, the World Bank is supporting investments in civil 
works related to corridor development through the other projects in this series.15   
 
Figure 1 - Identified HOA Transport Corridors16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 See Box 1 for more information on the SOP. Other projects in this series - the Horn of Africa Gateway Development Project (P161305), 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor Project (P174300), and the Horn of Africa Initiative: Regional Economic 
Corridor Project (Addis-Djibouti Corridor) (P174485) - are intended to support regional connectivity in Kenya, Djibouti and Ethiopia, 
respectively. 
16 Prepared by the World Bank as part of its HoA Initiative engagement 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 66 
 
 
b) Country Context 
 
10. 
Somalia is emerging from a legacy of three decades of cycles of violent conflict and fragility. Since 1991, 
the country has been fragmented by armed conflict, ad hoc regime changes and state capture. The August 2012 
transfer of power from a transitional to a full federal government in Mogadishu and the peaceful handover of 
power in 2017 following an election, generated domestic political momentum, and triggered international 
recognition and support for the new federal government. Over this period, Somalia has made encouraging steps 
towards a political settlement and the rehabilitation of government institutions. The Provisional Constitution of 
the Federal Republic of Somalia adopted on August 1, 2012, provides the legal foundation for the existence of the 
Federal Republic and is the first step towards a new federalism model for Somalia.  
 
11. 
The federation process has been complex and challenging despite the creation of several Federal 
Member States (FMS).17 The four new FMS in southern Somalia are Jubaland, Southwest, Galmudug and 
Hirshabelle, with Puntland in the north having been formed in 1998. Somaliland in the northwest is a 
semiautonomous region. Uncertainties however remain over the assignment of functions to different levels of 
government, pending a final constitutional settlement. Discussions over power and resource sharing are ongoing 
and remain highly sensitive. Disagreements in early 2021 over electoral processes and timing, with various FMS 
taking opposing views and low-level violence, led to a protracted presidential election, concluding in May 2022. 
Despite the successfully completed election, relations between the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and FMS 
will likely remain unstable and asymmetric for some time, even as inter-governmental cooperation arrangements 
emerge.18  
 
12. 
Decades of conflict compounded by recurring natural disasters have displaced a significant portion of 
society and damaged much of the country’s infrastructure, resulting in high rates of poverty and food insecurity. 
Of the estimated 16.4 million Somali population,19 as of 2021 at least 2.5 million live on the margins of food 
insecurity.20 777,000 Somalis currently reside outside of the country as refugees, and another 3.0 million are 
internally displaced, many of whom live in urban areas.21 Poverty is estimated at approximately 69 percent at the 
national level, with even higher rates seen in Mogadishu and among the internally displaced population.22 The 
poor are also likely to experience non-monetary poverty with worse access to basic services such as education, 
health, water and sanitation than the overall population.23 However, remittances sent home from outside the 
country have somewhat mitigated the extreme poverty in Somalia: a 2019 World Bank study shows that 
households receiving international remittances are less likely to be poor, with only 58 percent of remittance-
recipient households adjudged as poor, compared to 71 percent of non-recipient households.24 
 
13. 
Somalia’s economy has proven remarkably resilient, but resources for infrastructure and service 
delivery are limited and recent challenges threaten progress. Despite the perpetual civil conflict, the economy 
 
17 Somaliland remains separate from the federation. 
18 World Bank. Country Partnership Framework for Somalia. August 2018.  
19 World Development Indicators, World Bank. 2021 
20 FEWSNET – Somalia Food Security Outlook for October 2020 to May 2021 
21 UNHCR Refugee Data Finder. (URL: https://www.unhcr.org/refugee-statistics/download/?url=8w7IWa) 
22 World Bank, 2019. Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment: Findings from Wave 2 of the Somali High Frequency Survey. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/32323 
23 World Bank, 2017. Somalia - Systematic Country Diagnostic 
24 World Bank, 2019. Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment: Findings from Wave 2 of the Somali High Frequency Survey. (URL: 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/32323) 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 66 
 
 
was growing at a moderate pace before the COVID-19 induced downturn, growing by 2.9 percent in 2019, mainly 
supported by recovering agricultural production, sustained consolidation of peace and security, gradual increase 
in private investment, and donor inflows. The COVID-19 pandemic has interrupted this recovery, however, with a 
contraction of 2.2 percent in 2020 driven by reduced demand for livestock and other goods, slowing remittances, 
and general disruption. While there are some signs of recovery, the downside risk is substantial, including due to 
political uncertainty, locust infestations, drought, security threats, and more. With an estimated GDP per capita 
of US$446 in 2021, Somalia remains one of the poorest countries in the world.25   
 
14. 
With an arid and semi-arid climate, Somalia has suffered from a reoccurring cycle of droughts and 
floods. Droughts occur every 2-3 years and are often followed by floods, particularly in the south of the country. 
The drought in 2016-2017 exacerbated the country’s vulnerability by resulting in the loss of livelihoods and forcibly 
displacing more people and caused significant economic and environmental damages and losses. The agriculture 
sector, which underpins the Somali economy, experienced near total collapse with crop failures and increased 
livestock mortality due to widespread shortage of water. This resulted in loss of livelihoods for many, left 
approximately 6.7 million Somalis – more than half the population – in need of humanitarian assistance and 
displaced more than 926,000 people.26 The majority of the drought related displacement takes place in rural areas 
with populations moving to urban centers to join existing settlements for the internally displaced. The cities of 
Mogadishu, Baidoa and Kismayo host almost 40 percent of the total drought-related displacements.27 More 
recently, the country has been troubled by floods and an invasion of locusts, which have destroyed crops. Along 
the coastline, coastal flooding presents a risk that may increase with sea level rise and higher storm surges due to 
climate change.28 
 
15. 
Somalia could benefit from one of the most productive marine ecosystems in the world. With 3,300 km 
of coastline along the Indian Ocean and Gulf of Aden, Somalia has the longest coastline in continental Africa. The 
Exclusive Economic Zone of Somalia extends to 825,052 km2, covering 30 percent larger than its entire land area 
(637,657km2). Thanks to the Somali current and a major upwelling created by the Southwest monsoon, the 
productivity of Somali waters is very high. Its narrow continental shelf is home to several species of demersal fish 
and crustaceans and the offshore waters are prime fishing grounds for highly migratory fish species such as tuna 
and tuna-like species. Despite this potential, the country’s Blue Economy has remained largely untapped due to 
issues linked to weak governance, absence of management and rampant Illegal, unreported, and unregulated 
fishing activities. 
 
16. 
The FGS has significantly improved its ability to implement fiscal policy. Domestic revenue collection 
(tax and non-tax revenues) has been gradually increasing, although remains low, at an estimated 3.1 percent of 
GDP in 2021.29 This performance is driven by the government’s continued efforts to broaden the tax base including 
introduction of sales tax on goods and services; enhanced compliance; and improved collection capacity which 
has also seen an increase in non-tax revenue. However, revenue collection levels across the states vary 
significantly, ranging in 2018 from US$74 per capita in the territory controlled by the FGS, to US$0.4 per capita in 
Galmudug.30 Furthermore, fiscal space is constrained by recurrent expenditures related to the wage bill as well as 
 
25 World Bank. World Development Indicators 
26 Drought Impact Needs Assessment (DINA) Executive Summary. 2017. 
27 Humanitarian Bulletin, July 2017, United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
28 Think Hazard, consulted in December 2020. (URL: https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/226-somalia). 
29 Macro Poverty Outlook: Somalia, 2022. World Bank 
30 Domestic Resource Mobilization in Somalia, Somalia Public Expenditure Review, World Bank, 2021. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 66 
 
 
security and administrative services both accounting for about 90 percent of the total spending, hence crowding 
out social and economic sectors. The government’s fiscal performance has been monitored by the International 
Monetary Fund’s Staff Monitored Programs.31 The government still relies heavily on external assistance for socio-
economic infrastructure and services.  
 
17. 
The FGS has begun to rebuild its capacity to deliver results for its citizens, with the support of 
multilateral and bilateral development partners (DPs) including the WBG. Considerable resources have been 
invested in the public sector at the federal level through the strengthening of financial management (FM), 
institutional capacity, and payment of recurrent costs. The World Bank’s Special Financing Facility for Local 
Development32  developed procurement and supervision functions at the federal Ministry of Finance (MoF) and 
financed small-scale investments across Somalia, mainly in smaller secondary and tertiary cities. A World Bank-
financed urban project (Somalia Urban Resilience Project, Phase I and Phase II33) is supporting key cities by 
supporting the flow of funds from the federal to lower levels of government and strengthening project planning 
and implementation capacity at the municipal level.  
 
18. 
Despite signs of improving capacity and stability, global trends, including the COVID-19 pandemic, rising 
inflation, and food shortages driven by the war in Ukraine and drought, threaten to derail progress and set 
Somalia further back, both relative to its neighbors, and nominally in terms of development outcomes. Although 
testing remains limited, supporting contextual evidence indicates that COVID-19 remains a challenge. Rising prices 
and supply chain disruptions have led to growing food insecurity and rising prices, threatening the country’s 
economic and political recovery, potentially reversing the gains of the past decade. Reestablishing the country on 
a positive trajectory considering the various crises will require concerted effort from the FGS and FMS, as well as 
concerted support from DPs and with major export destinations. 
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
19. 
Leveraging its strategic location, Somalia is seeking to capitalize on its potential to be an economic 
integrator within the Horn of Africa, with trade and infrastructure services facilitating connectivity to global 
markets. It is located at the intersection of four regions: Africa, Asia, Europe and Middle East. Somalia’s seaports 
at Mogadishu, Bossaso, Kismayo and Berbera are potential assets - not only for Somalia but also its neighboring 
countries in the greater HoA, including Ethiopia, South Sudan, and Sudan - to improve connectivity and access 
greater economic opportunities in the global market. With Ethiopia’s landlocked 112 million citizens to its west, 
Somalia recognizes a potential role as transit country connecting the hinterland to global markets. With its long 
coastline, established seaports, important marine resources, planned new international sub-marine fiber optic 
cable connections, and orientation of its primary roads as beltways into the interior, Somalia has a potential 
competitive advantage to becoming a gateway to international markets for its landlocked neighbors. Driven by a 
desire to increase resilience, the diversification away from Djibouti as the primary gateway for Ethiopia, especially 
through the strategically located port of Berbera in Somaliland, has been a high priority for the Ethiopian 
government in recent years.  And yet, this significant potential for increased integration with hinterland countries 
is largely impeded by current infrastructure and institutional challenges, including failing road infrastructure, 
 
31 Somalia: Second Review Under the Staff-Monitored Program and Request for Three-Year Arrangements under the Extended Fund 
Facility-Press Release. International Monetary Fund. (URL: https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/CR/Issues/2020/03/26/Somalia-Second-
Review-Under-the-Staff-Monitored-Program-and-Request-for-Three-Year-49289) 
32 Trust funded activities under the Special Financing Facility for Local Development Project (P156257) 
33 Somalia Urban Resilience Project (P163857) and Somalia Urban Resilience Project II (P170922)  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 66 
 
 
limited port capacity, undeveloped cold-chain infrastructures and seafood value-chains, missing terrestrial fiber 
optic backbone networks to distribute international bandwidth, weak institutions, absent or unclear regulations, 
non-tariff barriers to trade and financial and fiscal challenges both at FGS and FMS levels. In addition, although 
the country’s strategic position presents opportunities, the presence of other ports in the wider region (including 
Mombasa in Kenya and Djibouti) presents some level of competition, highlighting the importance of addressing 
wider bottlenecks and identifying specific trade flows for which it has a competitive advantage. 
 
20. 
As addressing Somalia’s infrastructure gaps will be the work of decades, the project seeks to lay the 
foundation by supporting the technical work necessary for delivering a pipeline for economic corridor 
development and associated connectivity. The project will undertake analytical work to both underpin 
development of that pipeline, as well as to establish the tools for good sector management, and provide initial 
incremental steps for institutional and capacity development. No civil works will be undertaken under this project, 
but subsequent projects (to be potentially financed by the World Bank or others) will be launched as designs are 
completed. 
 
21. 
The Government has limited capacity and resources to provide basic service delivery and bridge the 
country’s vast infrastructure challenges. National institutions are either weak or nascent, and the FGS has 
identified several national sectoral agencies to be created. Both the Somali Ports Authority and the Somali 
National Highway Authority are officially established but are yet to be operationalized at scale. In the energy 
sector, there are discussions for the operationalization of a national energy authority. While the World Bank has 
successfully supported the establishment of the National Communication Authority, the telecom sector regulator, 
since 2018, the institutions remain nascent and in need of further support and technical assistance. The FGS 
sectoral ministries which are attempting to fill the gap have neither the capacity nor the analytical underpinnings 
to effectively do so. District governments (which function as municipal governments) have the primary 
responsibility for providing basic services. However, capacity and fiscal constraints limit their ability to undertake 
basic municipal functions, and outside of a few larger cities, these constraints deepen rapidly. FMS governments 
are only receiving a small recurrent budget through an inter-governmental fiscal transfer, and staffing is generally 
skeletal with limited capacity. Municipal/district governments’ own revenue collection is minimal and 
unstructured. They are dependent on external assistance or the private sector for capital investments. Delivery of 
services tends to be ad hoc due to lack of comprehensive urban development plans and limited resources.  
 
22. 
There is insufficient capacity for assessment and management of environmental and social risks in 
Somalia. Much remains to be done to operationalize policies, laws, and regulations for national or state-level 
environmental and social oversight either newly endorsed or under development, including a National Climate 
Change Policy, a National Environment Policy, a National Environment Management and Coordination Act, and an 
Environment and Social Impact Assessment Regulation which have all been recently ratified and adopted by the 
Somali government. Municipal-level development control and use of instruments such as zoning and land use 
planning is non-existent, generally. In addition to the newly created laws and regulations, with the support of the 
World Bank, some measure of progress has been noted over the past several years. In particular, the World Bank 
has been technically supporting the capacity of the FGS to address environmental requirements, first with the 
Directorate of the Environment and Climate Change in the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM), and subsequently 
in the recently created Ministry of Environment and Climate Change (MECC).  
 
23. 
The project will provide the first step towards the multi-decade capacity building process for the 
country’s transport and trade sectors.  While the initial set of designs and studies designed under the project will 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 66 
 
 
contribute to eventually meeting the infrastructure gap, sustainable access and connectivity within Somalia and 
between the countries of the region will require institutions empowered to maintain and expand this base over 
the long term. Capacity building activities within the project have been selected with a 10-to-15-year vision, 
prioritizing skills and capacities which will contribute to this longer-term objective. 
 
24. 
Gender inequality and Gender Based Violence (GBV) are prevalent issues in Somalia. According to the 
2019 World Bank Somali Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment, only 37 percent of women participate in the labor 
market, compared with 58 percent of men.34 Employment rates are low in general in Somalia compared to other 
low-income countries in Africa; however available data shows large employment gaps in the infrastructure sectors 
specifically, with men participating 34 times more than women in the transport and communications sectors, 
while women’s involvement in utilities is almost nil.35 There is no exact data about the number of women working 
in the maritime sector in Somalia, but it is well known that women are under-represented in this sector. In the 
fisheries sector, women are playing an important role acting as fishmongers buying fish from fishers and selling it 
to the public with minimal processing; however, fishing is still considered as male dominated sector.36 Evidence 
provides some explanations related to women’s inactivity, such as gender social norms, and gaps in school 
enrollment.37 World Bank research suggest that there is only a slight gender gap in relation to digital financial 
services in Somalia.38 GBV, including sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) is a significant challenge in Somalia,39 
driven by pervasive insecurity, increased vulnerability, and displacement. The persistent violations take the form 
of rape, physical assault, intimate partner violence, abduction, forced prostitution, exploitation, and human 
trafficking. Key risk factors identified include internal migration and displacements linked to conflict or disaster, 
limited settlement security for the forcibly displaced, poor living conditions and lessened clan protection. 
Displaced women and girls are among the most vulnerable population, and, in particular to violence. According to 
the GBV Integrated Management System, between January 2015 to June 2016, 73-78 percent of survivors of GBV 
were female Internally Displaced Persons.40  
 
a) Regional Economic Integration 
 
25. 
The WBG’s support towards regional integration in Africa is guided by the World Bank’s Africa Regional 
Integration Strategy.41 The strategy notes that priority should be given to: (i) selected transnational economic 
corridors where integration could be realized; (ii) addressing policy and other barriers to value addition and 
facilitating greater trade on these corridors; and (iii) integration priorities of the Regional Economic Communities 
and the expectations of the private sector in terms of connecting and growing markets.  
 
 
34 World Bank. (2019). Somali Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment. Findings from Wave 2 of the Somali High Frequency Survey. April 
2019 Report No. AUS000040710042. (URL: https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/epdf/10.1596/32323) 
35 ILOSTAT. Employment by sex and economic activity: (URL: 
https://www.ilo.org/shinyapps/bulkexplorer32/?lang=en&segment=indicator&id=EAP_2EAP_SEX_AGE_NB_A) 
36 United Nations Somalia. (2020). Fish give women in Somalia a taste of hope (URL: https://somalia.un.org/en/50252-fish-give-women-
somalia-taste-hope) 
37 Federal Government of Somalia. National Development Plan 2017-2019. 
38 World Bank. (2018), Mobile Money Ecosystem research 
39 World Bank. (2018). Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Somalia 2019-2022 (URL: 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/941361537906125793/pdf/SOMALIA-CPF-08312018.pdf) 
40 World Bank. (2018). Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Somalia (2019-2022): (URL: 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/941361537906125793/pdf/SOMALIA-CPF-08312018.pdf) 
41 World Bank. Supporting Africa’s Transformation: Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy for the Period FY21–FY23, 
Report No. 154458-AFR 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 66 
 
 
26. 
The economies of the HoA countries are mostly agriculture-based and rely on imports for most other 
goods. Imports from outside of the HoA region by member countries significantly exceed intra-regional trade. For 
instance, in 2017, Ethiopia’s and Kenya’s imports from the HoA amounted in value to US$67.5 million and US$42.6 
million, respectively, while their exports to the HoA amounted to US$20 million and US$267 million, respectively. 
Somalia on the other hand, imported goods worth US$190 million from the HoA countries in 2019 but exported 
officially less than US$1 million during the same year.42 Apart from the Kenyan exports to Somalia therefore, intra-
regional official trade in the region is at best marginal. See Table 2 and 3 for more detail.  
  
Table 2: Imports Value within and outside HoA by Country (US$ million) 
Country 
Imports from 
HoA 
 
Imports from 
Africa 
 Imports from the 
World  
% share of HoA in total 
imports from Africa 
% share of HoA 
in total Imports  
Djibouti 
 7.5  
 
 187 
 4,450  
4.03 
0.17 
Eritrea 
  1.7 
 
 140  
 396  
1.20 
0.43 
Ethiopia 
 67.5  
 
 741 
 9,760  
9.12 
2.54 
Kenya 
 42.6  
 
 2,250  
16,900  
1.80 
0.25 
Somalia 
 190.0  
 
 298 
 3,070  
63.80 
6.19 
 
Table 3: Exports Value within and from outside HoA by Country (US$ million) 
Country 
Exports to HoA 
Exports to Africa 
Exports to the 
World  
% share of HoA in total 
Exports to Africa 
% share of HoA in 
total Exports 
Djibouti 
 0.434  
  9.37 
 99.9  
4.63 
0.43 
Eritrea 
 0.0431 
 6.27  
 418 
0.68 
0.01 
Ethiopia 
 20  
 72.1 
 2,260  
27.7 
0.89 
Kenya 
 267  
 2,270  
 5,700  
11.7 
4.7 
Somalia 
 0.911 
 5.43 
 325  
16.78 
0.3 
Source: World Integrated Trade Solution database and Horn of Africa Regional Economic Memorandum (P172711), 2021 
 
27. 
Somalia’s integration with the HoA region, and the wider African economy, has the potential to spur 
growth. The development of integrated economic corridors, tackling access to transport, energy, internet, 
telecoms, and trade, have been found to deliver real positive outcomes. A recently published study43 on the 
potential impact of infrastructure development on the HoA found that a coordinated expansion in access to roads, 
electricity and internet, as could be envisioned through an economic corridor approach can have an important 
role in driving a structural change in employment (estimated at a 12 percent increase in the share of services 
employment). The same study also estimated that development of the HoA Initiative identified corridors, 
combined with trade facilitation support, could boost real income in Somalia by 6.3 percent. The development of 
such corridors is expected to support three important objectives: reduction in travel time to port for landlocked 
regions; generation of domestic and regional economic activity along the corridor (including in marginalized 
areas); and promotion of intra-regional trade. Such integration will be especially important to take advantage of 
the recently agreed African Continental Free Trade Area. 
 
28. 
However, the barriers to such integrated trade are many, going beyond just infrastructure provision. 
Road construction and rehabilitation along the country’s main corridors has been a challenge since the collapse 
of the state in 1991 and the road infrastructure is mostly in poor to very poor condition. Some sections are not 
paved which further hinders the movement of trucks, especially during rainy seasons, and substantially impact 
 
42 World Integrated Trade Solution database and Horn of Africa Regional Economic Memorandum , 2021 
43 “Infrastructure and Structural Change in the Horn of Africa”. World Bank. 2021 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 66 
 
 
transport prices and costs. Dilapidated road infrastructure is not the only driver of high transport costs and prices 
as documented by recent analytical work;44 support for complementary measures and studies are needed to 
unlock the economic potential of these “conveyor belts” for international trade and economic development in the 
country. As a start, the establishment of corridor observatories, drawing lessons from years of support in Sub-
Saharan Africa, will be instrumental in collecting disaggregate data on truck movements and trade performance 
along each section of the main corridors, and report major obstacles to trade such as checkpoints and roadblocks, 
security issues and market organization issues which have been demonstrated to significantly impact the transport 
prices and costs.45 In the absence of state intervention, central market associations/organizations in port cities 
(Mogadishu, Berbera, Bossaso, Kismayo), in major trade gateways (e.g. Galkayo, Lascanod) and in some border 
towns (e.g., Dhobley, Elwak, Beled Hawo or Tog Wajale) have developed to organize and streamline operations 
where most trade and long-distance transport transactions materialize. Opportunities for more efficient 
operations are many, including in port-market linkages, freight allocation, cargo insurance arrangements, bulking 
and storage, and in monitoring prices. 
 
29. 
HoA countries are members of various regional bodies, although the effectiveness of these as economic 
blocks is somewhat tenuous. For instance, Somalia, Djibouti, Kenya and Ethiopia are members of the 
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa.  
Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya and Somalia are also party to the Agreement Establishing the African Continental Free 
Trade Agreement, although Somalia is still in the process of ratification. Although progress has been made to 
expand the coverage of these and several other agreements, effective implementation remains a challenge. The 
recently approved Kenya Horn of Africa Gateway Development Project46 will support initiatives towards agreeing 
on common trading protocols, starting bilaterally between Ethiopia and Kenya, followed by integration with the 
rest of the members of the HoA.  
 
30. 
 Kenya, Ethiopia and Somalia have long common borders, with alternative border posts for cross-border 
trade.47 However, formal trade has been limited in part by the lack of effective border management systems and 
protocols, and general insecurity which on many occasions led to the closing of the border posts or the prohibition 
of cross-border movements for cargo and/or individuals. Despite these limitations, informal and illegal trade 
thrives. Kenya has established a lead agency, Customs and Border Control, responsible for the management of 
border crossings and controls very strictly the movement of cargo and individuals, with stringent visa 
requirements preventing most Somalis (including drivers) from crossing the border and circulating in Kenya. The 
only Somali drivers reported to cross the borders and deliver freight into Kenyan territory (up to the refugee camp 
of Dadaab for example or even Garissa) hold dual nationalities.48 Similar arrangements are reported along the 
Ethiopia/Somalia borders, but restrictions are more severe on trucks than individuals and it is not uncommon to 
observe truck drivers illegally changing truck plates at the borders to circulate into the neighboring country.  In 
this context, it is paramount to put in place effective border management measures and transit systems to enable 
the efficient and secure movement of goods and individuals across borders thereby facilitating regional 
integration and delivering the job creation and economic development promise for local populations.  
 
 
44 World Bank. 2021. Somalia Country Economic Memorandum: Towards an Inclusive Jobs Agenda  
45 Ibid. 
46 Project ID P161305, and the first in the SoP which includes this project 
47 The United Nations Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for example supervises the status of 19 border posts between 
Somalia and its neighboring countries (Djibouti, Ethiopia or Kenya) in the periodic public COVID-19 Monthly reports.   
48 World Bank. 2021. Somalia Country Economic Memorandum: Towards an Inclusive Jobs Agenda  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 66 
 
 
31. 
Although Somalia is relatively highly urbanized, development of the hinterland and borderlands will be 
vital, as farmers and pastoralists living in rural areas are not well connected to domestic or international 
markets. According to the World Development Indicators about 7.6 million live in Somalia’s urban areas (as of 
2021), with half of estimated to live in the primary city, Mogadishu. Those not living in urban areas face significant 
connectivity gaps: The Rural Access Index, which measures the share of the rural population that is within 2 km of 
an all-weather road, has been calculated at just 31.2 percent, compared to 56 percent in neighboring Kenya.49 In 
most areas of the country, total transport costs to a large city, a proxy for estimating access to domestic markets, 
are found to be very high, at US$20 to US$50 per ton, despite relatively short distances. The transport sector is 
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and natural disasters like flooding, extreme temperatures, and 
landslides, especially in the semi-desert areas and along riverbeds in the South. A resilient transport sector could, 
in turn, enhance the resilience of communities by improving food and water security and providing all-season 
access to services like education and health. 
 
32. 
The Somali economy has been traditionally dominated by pastoralism and crop production, followed 
by fisheries and forestry and these four sectors are supporting over 80 percent of the population. Somalia has 
a long tradition of pastoralism and pastoral communities. Most pastoralists in the North of Somalia are in the 
Haud and Sool Plateau, and they are also very present along the borders with Ethiopia and Kenya. Somalia has 
some of the largest livestock populations in the world, especially camels, goats, sheep and cattle. Yet the 
challenges to trade this livestock across borders, whether through international ports or the land borders 
(especially with Kenya) are many. Critical infrastructure improvements are needed to support transformation of 
this sector and boost its value addition in the country, including investment into meat processing facilities at the 
ports and the development of reliable cold chains.  
 
33. 
The potential for the trade of fish and the broader Blue Economy to better contribute to the regional 
economy remains largely untapped. Rebuilding, managing, and diversifying the fishery sector is essential to 
strengthening food security and coastal livelihoods as well as to promoting employment in the sector and generate 
revenues for the country. With a strong market for fish in Ethiopia, development of the necessary infrastructure 
and systems to harvest and transport goods into the hinterland has strong economic potential. However, the state 
of the resources is largely unknown, the institutional capacity is weak, the legal and regulatory framework is 
incomplete, management and governance arrangements are missing and basic fisheries infrastructures, e.g., 
fishing ports and landing sites, cold chain and processing infrastructure, are lacking.  
 
b) Infrastructure Integration 
 
34. 
Somalia’s national transport infrastructure has suffered dramatically from a lack of maintenance and 
investment during the civil war and the current infrastructure gaps in the transport sector are massive. Of the 
21,830 km of roads in the country, only 2,860 km are estimated to be paved (13 percent), and most of this paved 
network is believed to be in poor or very poor condition. Only 31.2 percent of the rural population has access to 
an all-season road, with the majority without reliable access.50 Along the coast, the lack of infrastructure expresses 
itself as a severe limitation on the fishing industry, with a low intensity of development of coastal infrastructure 
in some regions (e.g., Galmudug and Hirshabelle).  
 
 
49 World Bank Development Data Hub, Rural Access Index. Updated 2022. 
https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/search/dataset/0038250/Rural-Access-Index--RAI- 
50 SDG 9.1.1. Rural Access Index - https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/rural-access-index-rai 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 66 
 
 
35. 
Since 2012, the federal government and the FMS, with the support of development partners have begun 
to identify and act on initial priorities for critical investment in the road sector. The AfDB supported the FGS to 
conduct a sector evaluation (Transport Sector Needs Assessment, 2016) to identify priorities in the sector. Few 
road reconstruction/rehabilitation projects are under preparation or implementation: the Berbera-Tog Wajale 
corridor and the Burco-Berbera road (supported by the UK’s Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office 
and the Abu Dhabi Fund for Development) and the Berbera-Hargeisa road (also supported by the Abu Dhabi Fund 
for Development) in Somaliland, the Beledweyne-Galkayo and Garowe-Galkayo roads in Puntland  and the 
Galkayo-Hobyo road in Galmudug (supported by Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), 
AfDB and the EU), the Luuq-Doolow road in Jubaland, (supported by AfDB and the EU) and the Mogadishu-Afgoye 
and Mogadishu-Jowhar roads in Banadir/Hirshabelle (supported by the Qatar Fund for Development).51 Beyond 
these interventions, other road works are not being planned, let alone shovel-ready, because of a lack of requisite 
technical studies and resources on the part of the FGS. The institutional capacities of the ministries are limited, 
and the governance challenges are many, especially due to absence of clear demarcation of authorities between 
the federal government and FMS in the management of the sector.  
 
36. 
Somalia currently has four ports operating as international ports which serve as the gateways to the 
major transport corridors in the country. In Somaliland and Puntland, the ports of Berbera and Bosasso are being 
operated through a long-term concession with a private company. In Mogadishu, the main port of the country is 
managed and operated through a recently renegotiated concession contract. In Jubaland, the port of Kismayo is 
publicly owned and managed. Although some progress has been made in recent years in upgrading the 
infrastructure of these ports, substantial investments are needed to achieve the country’s ambitions in the 
maritime sector, especially in view of the substantial increase in demand forecasted for hinterland countries 
(Ethiopia and Kenya). Additional port investments are also planned (e.g., in Hobyo, Galmudug) by FMS willing to 
take advantage of the strategic maritime location of the country to spur the development of their respective 
regions. 
 
37. 
Road safety is a challenge in Somalia, but the extent of the issue is unclear due to limited data. The 
combination of failing infrastructure, absent regulations and weak enforcement of the traffic laws which do exist 
lead to Somalia having a relatively high level of road crash fatalities and injuries for a country with such a low 
motorization rate (27.10 fatalities per 100,000 population).52 This is unreliable, however, due to a number of 
reasons: it is increasingly out of date, estimates are based on unreliable information, and, most importantly, data 
collection has only covered part of the country.  
 
38. 
Women and girls are disproportionally affected by inadequate road and transport infrastructure. For 
instance, as per the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD), limited geographical access is one of the main reasons 
behind the low usage of health facilities by women, contributing, among others, to maternal mortality, which 
remains persistently high at between 732-1400 deaths per 100,000 live births, with little improvement in the last 
50 years.53 In addition, poor transport infrastructure exacerbates women’s already heightened vulnerability to 
 
51 These are estimated to cover about 1900 km of roads, with interventions ranging from periodic maintenance to rehabilitation, and with 
varying likelihood of eventual delivery. 
52 WHO Global Status Report on Road Safety. World Health Organization.2018 https://extranet.who.int/roadsafety/death-on-the-
roads/#country_or_area/SOM 
53 World Bank, Federal Republic of Somalia Systematic Country Diagnostic, 2018 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 66 
 
 
climate change and difficulty accessing services for themselves and their families during periods of forced 
displacement.54 
 
39. 
Access to electricity services is low at 33 percent, leaving 10 million in the dark, out of which 7.5 million 
are in rural areas. Due to the context of fragility and conflict affecting the country since the 90s, the power sector 
infrastructure and institutional apparatus has never been re-built, which translated into a lack of strategic focus 
on the electricity access agenda. Services are currently provided by electricity service providers operating in island 
mode (mini-grids) through diesel gen-sets – an entrepreneurial answer to the lack of infrastructure planning. 
Electricity supply is inadequate in quantity, quality, and affordability to serve the Somali population and the 
constrained electricity consumption negatively affects productivity and economic growth. The country is currently 
discussing possible technical and political membership to the Eastern Africa Power Pool,55 which would integrate 
the country into regional and continental power trade, and strategically position the country for trading with the 
Middle East. 
 
40. 
While the telecoms sector is perhaps more developed than other infrastructure sectors, Somalia lags 
its regional peers in terms of development of national broadband network infrastructure and access. Until 
recently, Somalia was only served by one submarine cable, making the country prone to major communication 
outages. Today, two international submarine fiber optic cables land in Somalia, although with further cables are 
on the way. Somalia is also able to access capacity via terrestrial cross-border links to Kenya (albeit through weak 
microwave links) in the south and to Djibouti in the north, via Somaliland’s terrestrial fiberoptic network. In the 
next three years, the operationalization and arrival of several new regional submarine cables is set to markedly 
change the connectivity landscape in Somalia, with ripple effects for the wider sub-region - creating opportunities 
for increased capacity, resilience, and competition. However, Somalia’s weak terrestrial backbone network 
presents a major bottleneck in maximizing the impact of this surge in international capacity via new cables and 
landing points. Most of south-central Somalia is served only by expensive and slow microwave or satellite links, 
which throttle transmission capacity. Most end-user access networks are based on cellular wireless technology. 
While access to mobile communication services (2G) is thought to cover most of the main population centers, 
mobile broadband (3G and 4G) services are only available in Somalia’s largest cities, resulting in some of the lowest 
broadband subscription figures in the region.  
 
41. 
Application of the ‘dig once’ principle, with coordinated deployment of linear infrastructure56 along key 
regional corridors in Somalia, would reduce cost of deployment and hasten the rate at which Somalia is able to 
bridge its vast infrastructure gaps. Aligning infrastructure investments across sectors allows for shared right of 
ways, coordinated civil works, and delivery mutually reinforcing benefits. With such coordination, however, comes 
a need for wider sector-based network planning that requires sectoral institutional capacity building and an 
improved capacity for integrated infrastructure planning, platforms for inter-sectoral coordination and 
collaboration, as well as joint efforts to support the development of an enabling regulatory framework that cuts 
across infrastructure sectors - e.g. in relation to rights of way, private public partnerships, environmental and 
social risk management. 
 
 
54 See, for instance, Somalia’s National Adaptation Program of Action on Climate Change, 2013. 
55 The Eastern Africa Power Pool is a regional institution working to interconnect the electricity grids of eleven countries in Eastern Africa 
in order to take advantage of excess capacity within the network and facilitate the trade of power between members. 
56 Such as roads, electricity transmission lines, and fiber optic cables 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 66 
 
 
42. 
A fragile security situation is an ongoing challenge for infrastructure development in Somalia, especially 
in the central and southern parts of the country. Although the level of violence has decreased over the last 
decade, instability continues to threaten the FGS and FMS governments, with Al-Shabaab and other non-state 
actors continuing to conduct attacks throughout most of the country. For economic corridor development, 
improvement in security and stability is both a precondition to effective development, and a possible outcome of 
infrastructure development.57 The prioritization of investments within Somalia will have to take security into 
account, as a consideration for project readiness, as an ongoing threat to be mitigated through the project cycle, 
and through its mitigation as a potential project outcome.  
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
 
43. 
The project contributes to the World Bank’s twin goals of eliminating extreme poverty and boosting 
shared prosperity through provision of critical economic infrastructure and basic services for some of the 
world’s poorest and most vulnerable people in one of the most fragile countries.58 The project also contributes 
to the World Bank’s Somalia Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY19-2259 which is under discussion for 
extension to FY23 as part of a draft Performance and Learning Review. It supports Focus Area 1, which aims to 
strengthen institutions to deliver services while addressing the cross-cutting consideration of building resilience 
to fragility and shocks. It also supports Focus Area 2, which focuses on restoring economic resilience and 
opportunities. By laying the groundwork for further infrastructure development and supporting related capacity 
building, the project could create opportunities for public or private investment which will contribute to the 
country’s economic resilience and recovery. 
 
44. 
The project will contribute to the Somalia Ninth National Development Plan (NDP-9) 2020-2024. The 
Economic Development Pillar of the NDP-9 aims to build “a more diverse and competitive economy capable of 
taking advantage of emerging regional trade opportunities [as] the best route to broadening growth and 
mobilizing revenue in the medium to long term.” NDP-9 recognizes that the investment is needed in trade 
corridors which link Somali ports to neighboring countries.  
 
45. 
The project also contributes to the World Bank’s Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance 
Strategy for Africa (FY21-23).60 There is relevance to Priority 1 of the Strategy “Generate economic dynamism 
along regional economic corridors” and its objectives 1.1 “Develop regional infrastructure along economically 
important trunk routes”, 1.3 “Harmonize policy and reduce nontariff barriers to promote trade and improve 
productivity along these economic corridors, and 1.4 “Build effective stakeholder coalitions to deepen integration 
along these economic corridors”. The Strategy identifies the need to spatially prioritize interventions to grow the 
economy and deepen regional integration, while also addressing some of the ‘softer’ aspects of effective corridor 
development, such as regional trade policy and private sector development.  
 
 
57 Transport development, as part of a broader suite of actions, has been shown to have had a positive impact on stability in some 
countries, as it serves to increase economic interdependence between regions and serves as a visible representation of state influence 
and control. See, for instance, the discussion in “Forced Displacement in the Great Lakes Region: A Development Approach.” World Bank, 
Washington, DC. 2015, and “World Development Report: Conflict, Security, and Development”. Washington, DC: World Bank. 2011 
58 As outlined in the Global Crisis Response Framework (Navigating Multiple Crises, Staying the Course on Long-Term Development: The 
World Bank Group’s Response to the Crises Affecting Developing Countries) and World Bank Group Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and 
Violence 2020-2025) 
59 Discussed on August 29, 2018. Report No. 12473-SO 
60 Discussed on December 7, 2020. Report No. 154458-AFR 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 66 
 
 
46. 
The project is aligned with the objectives the HoA Initiative. Consistent with the Ministerial Communique 
launching the HoA Initiative,61 the overall objective of the HoA Initiative is to rapidly develop the sub-region by 
facilitating regional integration and cooperation among the five HoA countries. The project will directly contribute 
to Pillars 1 of the HoA Initiative, namely “An Interconnected Horn”, that focuses on implementing cross-border 
regional infrastructure projects including transport corridors; while facilitating progress towards Pillar 2: “More 
Trade, More Growth, More Jobs”, that focuses on trade and economic integration, and Pillar 4: “Human Capital 
Development”; as well as the other goals. 
 
47. 
The HoA Initiative gives importance to transforming transport and logistics corridors into economic 
corridors by easing the transport of goods and people and providing incentives to stakeholders to trade and 
engage in various economic activities along the corridors. The resulting effect is increased trade and economic 
diversification and specialization which leads to wealth generation and social cohesion, inclusivity, and stability 
and chance to bring about security and peace. With 40 percent of the road kilometers and 4 of the 7 port outlets 
for the corridors, Somalia carries an outsized role and responsibility in the HoA Initiative. Figure 1 shows the 
identified HoA Initiative corridors and the Somali linkages to Kenya, Ethiopia, and Djibouti.  
 
48. 
The project is aligned with the World Bank’s Africa Climate Change Business Plan,62 the Somalia 
Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC),63 and the National Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA).64 
Somalia’s NDC and NAPA identify water resources, agriculture and food security, animal husbandry, health, 
marine and coastal resources as particularly vulnerable to natural disasters and climate change; and propose 
adaptation actions to reduce risk among the vulnerable population. The destruction of the natural resource base 
(forest and range resources that provide the raw material production of charcoal in Somalia) is identified in 
Somalia’s NDC as one of the greatest challenges and a key driver of recurrent humanitarian crises in the country 
due to severe droughts and impacts on pastoralist activities. By developing resilient infrastructure and 
implementing measures to overcome the deforestation and rangeland degradation the project will contribute to 
the achievement of Somalia’s NDC targets.  
 
49. 
 The NAPA also identifies women in rural communities as the most vulnerable groups in Somalia to the 
impacts of climate change. Some of the roles that women play in society are impacted by droughts and floods 
such as fetching drinking water. And women are found to be the ones who must find solutions to feed their 
families in crisis situations and are exposed to physical insecurity during migration. The World Bank’s Africa 
Climate Change Business Plan65 highlights the importance and urgency of countries to conduct development that 
addresses climate impacts and manages climate risks. The project aims to ultimately enhance the climate 
resilience of the transport, energy and information technology sectors and of the communities served by 
integrating these considerations into the designs being prepared by the project for future civil works. 
 
50. 
The proposed project is the second in a Series of Projects (SOP). The SOP consists of a series of 
interdependent projects to support the HoA Initiative involving multiple borrowers, all of which will need to 
participate for the program’s objectives to be achievable. See Box 1 for more information on the SOP.  
 
 
61 Communique of October 2019, following Side Event During the World Bank Annual Meetings 
62 Africa Climate Business Plan, 2020. (URL: Reports (worldbank.org)) 
63 Somalia’s Nationally Determined Contribution to the UNFCCC, 2015. (URL: Somalia's INDCs.pdf (unfccc.int)) 
64 Somalia’s National Adaptation Program of Action on Climate Change, 2013. (URL: som01.pdf (unfccc.int)) 
65 Africa Climate Business Plan, 2020. (URL: Reports (worldbank.org)) 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 66 
 
 
Box 1: Description of the Series of Projects (SOP) 
 
Program Objective: The overarching objective of the HoA Program Series of Projects is “enhancing connectivity 
among the HoA countries and access to seaports, facilitation of domestic and regional trade and economic 
integration, and road safety.” 
 
The SOP was created to support the countries of the region to build the regional integration links necessary to 
achieve the program objective, beginning to address the large financing requirements while tackling the wide 
range of needs of the individual countries. This interdependent/multiple borrower type of SOP aims to achieve 
benefits that go beyond each country’s boundaries, creating regional public goods and generating positive 
externalities. The first operation under the SOP was the Kenya Horn of Africa Gateway Development Project 
(P161305), which was approved September 8, 2020. Preparations are underway for subsequent operations in 
the SOP, including in Djibouti (the Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor Project 
(P174300)) and Ethiopia (the Horn of Africa Initiative: Regional Economic Corridor Project (Addis-Djibouti 
Corridor) (P174485)). 
 
The SOP’s objectives and structures remain relevant for the countries in the region, and for Somalia specifically, 
as demonstrated by the thirteen Horn of Africa Ministerial Meeting held in June of 2022 which was attended 
by senior leaders from the member countries, and which called for continued investment by donors in the 
initiative, while preserving the country-led focus.66  
 
 
51. 
The proposed program meets the criteria for IDA Regional Program Funding as: (i) it covers the fragile 
and conflict prone Somalia and is contiguous and economically inter-dependent on the countries of Kenya, 
Ethiopia and Djibouti; (ii) it contributes to transport and communication connectivity among Somalia, Kenya, 
Ethiopia and Djibouti; (iii) the eventual expected full transit efficiency gains will only be achieved with the direct 
and integrated involvement of the countries sharing the corridor; (iv) the benefits can only be adequately achieved 
through the implementation of an integrated set of infrastructure, trade and development facilitation activities in 
the countries the Somali economic corridors adjoin; (v) the program enhances competition among transport 
corridors in the sub-region; and (vi) the groundwork initiated in the project for development of Somali economic 
corridors identified under the HoA Initiative will eventually link more than three contiguous countries.  
 
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 
A. Project Development Objective 
 
Program Objective 
 
 
66 Communique from the 13th Ministerial Meeting. Horn of Africa Initiative. June 30, 2022 (URL: https://hoainitiative.org/communique-
from-13th-ministerial-meeting/) 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 66 
 
 
52. The overarching objective of the HoA Program Series of Projects, which the proposed project will contribute 
to, is “enhancing connectivity among the HoA countries and access to seaports; facilitation of domestic and 
regional trade and economic integration, and road safety”. 
 
PDO Statement 
 
53. 
The Project Development Objective is to prepare a spatially coordinated investment pipeline of 
economic corridor projects, and to strengthen the national government’s management of selected sectors. 
 
PDO Level Indicators 
 
54. Expected results indicators include: 
a. Value of spatially coordinated economic corridor pipeline projects ready for investment  
b. National Transport Policy developed and submitted to Cabinet for approval  
c. Harmonized trade facilitation measures are piloted in at least two FMS  
d. Number of FGS staff working for at least a month with the PCU, disaggregated by gender 
 
B. Project Components 
 
55. Financing of the proposed project is leveraged from three sources, the Regional IDA Window, Somalia’s 
National IDA allocation, and the Horn of Africa Multi-Donor Trust Fund, as agreed by the HoA MDTF 
Partnership Council.  The project financing is outlined in Table 4 below. 
• 
Regional IDA (US$20 million) will finance the preparation of regional road corridors and associated digital 
development and trade aspects, as included under component 1. 
• 
National IDA (US$38 million) will complement regional IDA by contributing to component 1, prepare 
national specific activities under component 2, and contribute to cost of capacity building and project 
management under components 3 and 4, respectively.  
• 
HoA MDTF (US$5 million) complements IDA financing with contributary financing of component 1 and 
Trade Capacity Development in component 3.  
 
Table 4: Elaboration of SHIIP Components and Financing Sources 
Components / Financing (US$ millions) 
Regional IDA National IDA 
MDTF 
TOTAL 
1 Development of Regional Economic Corridors 
16.8 
8.4 
4.8 
30.0 
2 Connectivity to Economic Corridors 
- 
18.0 
- 
18.0 
3 Institutional and Capacity Development 
1.0 
6.6 
0.2 
7.8 
4 Project Management 
2.2 
5.0 
- 
7.2 
5 Contingent Emergency Response 
- 
- 
- 
0.0 
TOTAL 
20.0 
38.0 
5.0 
63.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56. 
The Somalia – Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) aims to initiate the unlocking of 
the economic potential of Somalia’s development corridors. This will be achieved through the preparation of an 
initial round of pipeline of investment-ready and spatially considered regional corridor infrastructure, while laying 
the groundwork for good sector management by taking early steps in institutional and capacity development 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 66 
 
 
anchored in professional sectoral analysis. The project components represent an important start in what will be a 
long-term development of the 2,500 km on the Somali side of the corridors identified in the HoA Initiative 
connecting to Kenya, Ethiopia and Djibouti. Recognizing however that infrastructure condition is not the only 
driver of high transport costs and prices as documented by recent analytical work,67 the project will support 
complementary measures and studies to unlock the economic potential of these “conveyor belts” for international 
trade and economic development in the country. While the financing focus is inevitably on the technical road 
studies for key corridors, where opportune these will include other linear infrastructure, mainly transmission lines 
and digital broadband.  It will also address improvement of local road connectivity and access where appropriate 
as well as other spatial consideration in planning for ports, fisheries, and economic and social dimensions intended 
to optimizing impact of the eventual investments.  
 
57. 
Achievement of project activities will largely be through technical, analytical and diagnostic studies. In 
addition to the subject focus of each of these studies, the terms of reference (ToRs) for these will also be 
systematically molded to incorporate aspects related to capacity development and GBV/SEA. All ToRs are subject 
to clearance by the World Bank. 
 
58. 
There is a lack of capacity in Somalia for infrastructure planning, development and management and 
the proposed project will support capacity enhancement at both institutional and human resource levels.68 The 
project’s capacity building activities will largely be attained by learning-by-doing, while technical and analytical 
studies will be formulated to ensure engagement, technical exposure and decision making by civil servants, 
including by incorporating knowledge transfers through embedment of civil servants with consultant teams and 
training sessions in the subject matters. The project aims at a forward-looking strategy for sectoral development, 
identified to cumulatively contribute to a long-term institutional and sectoral vision to leave behind competencies 
beyond the life of the project.  
 
59. 
There is a recognition that infrastructure development can serve to address gender inequality, but road 
works and infrastructure can also create opportunities for risk factors that are conducive to GBV, including SEA. 
Gender assessment will be used to collect baseline data on gender gaps in employment in the fishery and trade 
sectors, including the barriers that women face to benefit from potential new interventions to be informed by the 
collected data.  These studies will be used as vehicles to understand and plan for addressing gender issues by 
drawing on the guidance provided by the World Bank’s Africa Region Gender Action Plan for FY 18-22, mainly as 
it relates to gender gaps in jobs and with regard to the gender constraints in fragility, conflict, and violence 
settings. Through social and GBV assessments, the focus will be on building a better understanding of the specific 
risk factors that may contribute to GBV and SEA as World Bank transport engagement is scaled from preparatory 
activities envisioned in this project, to implementation of major civil works in the near future.  
 
Component 1: Development of Regional Economic Corridors (US$30 million equivalent; of which US$16.8 
million from Regional IDA, US$8.4 million from National IDA, and US$4.8 million from the HoA MDTF) 
 
60. 
This component will carry out the identification of a regional economic corridor, prioritizing corridor 
road sections, including technical design of road works, preparation of environmental and social management 
instruments, conducting diagnostics of area wide trade facilitations and development measures and actions, 
 
67 World Bank. 2021. Somalia Country Economic Memorandum: Towards an Inclusive Jobs Agenda 
68 It will draw lessons on institutional strengthening from projects implemented in Somalia in the last several years, such as in public 
financial management. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 66 
 
 
economic analysis, and other preparatory analysis and design studies. It is expected that close to 550 km of the 
prioritized regional economic corridors will be subject to technical preparation and brought to bidding stage. 
Identified sections will be assessed to identify relevant improvements needed and preparatory works conducted, 
including design of the road works, environmental and social risk mitigation instruments, and economic analyses. 
Climate resilient considerations will be included in the design of road works. Upon identification of a corridor and 
corridor road sections for design, this component will finance diagnostics of area-wide trade facilitation and 
development measures and actions aimed at augmenting the trade viability of the corridor, such as analysis of 
cross-border trade and design of relevant interventions for improved and secured cross-border trade movements 
at international or FMS borders. Where FGS strategies and plans for new transmission lines and digital 
development coincide linearly with a selected economic corridor, design of these will be undertaken.  
 
61. 
A methodology for prioritization was established in the preparation of this project to determine the 
priority sections to be included in the project by way of an inclusive and objective methodology. Climate risks 
and vulnerability are also considered in the road prioritization methodology The description also identifies primary 
road corridors within Somalia, largely aligned with those identified in the HoA Initiative, of which the project will 
finance a subset for design studies. Within the prioritization, eventual corridors and road sections are expected to 
be subject of discussion between FGS and FMS. While optimally the component will support development of a 
contiguous corridor, the prevailing political and security considerations may require financing preparation of 
corridor sections that are not contiguous. An analysis of the mobility barriers that women and men face to benefit 
from corridors will be conducted in order to define design features that could improve mobility, as well as 
potential complementary interventions defined by the population. 
 
Component 2: Connectivity to Economic Corridors (US$18 million equivalent from National IDA) 
 
62. 
This component will prepare a national level program of activities to leverage the development of 
economic corridors through local connectivity and accessibility. While not specifically cross border regional 
integration activities, the identified projects will be those which complement the regional nature of the project, 
either by providing complementary investments to those in Component 1 or building links between the 
fragmented member states of Somalia. Specifically, the component will finance activities which include the 
following:69 
 
• 
Conducting feasibility, design, and other studies necessary to prepare and bring to bidding stage 
approximately 900 km of secondary and tertiary roads linked to the identified corridors. Climate resilience 
considerations will be integrated in road design studies  
• 
Designing new transmission lines and digital development activities along selected secondary and tertiary 
roads, including an integrated energy demand assessment; 
• 
Conducting operational or environmental assessment and associated technical designs to linked and selected 
maritime ports; 
• 
Conducting an economic assessment of the fisheries sector’s infrastructure and services, which may include 
carrying out:  (i) an opportunity and cost benefit analyses for fishing, or multi-usage ports along the coast of 
Somalia, (ii) a needs assessment and investment plan for pre- and post-harvest infrastructures in major ports 
and in smaller ports, (iii) detailed feasibility studies for fishing or multi-usage port developments and 
associated infrastructures,  (iv) preparation of associated environmental and social management instruments, 
 
69 Listed activities in components 2 and 3, may be integrated in larger assignments during implementation.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 66 
 
 
and (v) an assessment on climate risks and port vulnerability; and (vi) analysis of gender gaps and barriers for 
women to participate and benefit from the fishery sector; 
• 
Conducting area-wide trade facilitation and development analyses and proposing targeted interventions to 
support job and value creating trade activities, including identifying opportunities to address the barriers for 
women to benefit from trade opportunities. 
 
Component 3: Institutional and Capacity Development (US$7.8 million equivalent; of which US$1.0 million 
from Regional IDA, US$6.6 million from National IDA, and US$0.2 million from the HoA MDTF) 
 
63. 
This component will support select institutional and capacity development within the FGS,70 especially 
within the transport and trade sectors. It will build the capacity of selected Federal Government ministries, 
departments, agencies and institutions, including: (a) the institutional capacity of trade and transport MDAs and 
institutions for planning, implementing, maintaining and governing the infrastructure sector, and monitoring 
service efficiency; (b) the technical, managerial, planning, procurement, financial management and socio-
environmental skills of staff of respective agencies and institutions; and  (c) carrying out a needs assessment, 
formulating a framework for institutional and  human resource capacities. 
 
64. 
Capacity building activities have been selected with a long-term vision of sectoral development, 
identified to serve as first steps on a long road towards a forward-looking institutional and sectoral vision. 
Recognizing that major infrastructure gaps exist, resulting from decades of conflicts and fragility, the institutional 
capacity must be strengthened in all sectors. Within this project, capacity building activities are focused on the 
planning, implementing, and leveraging economic corridors, including activities in transport and trade as well as 
those associated with planning integrated corridors. As may be considered appropriate during the implementation 
of the project, the identified activities may be delivered as a stand-alone activity or integrated in larger pieces of 
assignments to streamline delivery and avoid overwhelming beneficiaries. In addition, the activities will be phased 
throughout project implementation in order to moderate the demand on implementing and beneficiary agencies. 
Overall training programs will be financed on targeted basis as a complement to capacity development to be 
achieved through hand-on exposure and technical assistance (TA) work. Capacity and analytical support will 
include: 
 
• 
Transport 
o Development of the National Transport Policy under the guidance of the Ministry of Transport and 
Civil Aviation (MTCA) and incorporating the Ministry of Ports and Marine Transport (MPMT) and other 
stakeholders.  
o Development of a transport sector climate resilience diagnosis. 
o Development of a Road Sector Strategy. 
o Road sector studies, such as: (i) road condition surveys of prioritized corridors and connecting roads 
(covering approximately 2,500 km); (ii) road safety diagnosis and a National Road Safety Strategy 
(mapping out key stakeholders, institutional ownership and capacities, existing initiatives and a 
support framework, as well as conducting a road safety audit on selected primary corridors to identify 
blackspots); and (iii) conducting a gender and social inclusion analysis in trade and transport for future 
investment projects; 
 
70 While important capacity gaps exist within FMS institutions as well, the project scope is focused on building national level capacity as a 
first step and aligned with the national level roads prioritized during the project. It is expected that subsequent projects conducting civil 
works in specific locations will support development of relevant FMS institutions. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 66 
 
 
o Update and expansion of the National Ports Masterplan to inform a cohesive national development 
and management of the sector, including development of a Ports and Maritime Transport Strategy.  
o Preparation of a National Highway Authority Development and Capacity Framework. 
o Preparation of a Somali Port Authority Development and Capacity Framework. 
• 
Trade Facilitation 
o Preparation of a program of activities to support an enabling environment for trade within the 
country, such as design of harmonized trade facilitation instruments across FMS to facilitate and 
secure the movement of goods across FMS borders and improve the collection of tax revenues. Such 
initiatives will possibly include the development of a national transit regime for inter-FMS trade 
(aligned with regional Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa transit instruments), and the 
design and pilot-implementation of selected transport facilitation measures such as a cargo tracking 
system to improve security, efficiency and revenue collection for long-distance transport operations; 
a feasibility study for the development of a single-window platform for inter-FMS and interregional 
trade; a capacity building program to strengthen data collection and trade development capacities 
among relevant public and private sector agencies (e.g. chambers of commerce) at the federal and 
FMS level and to support the set-up of regional corridor management mechanisms (e.g. corridor 
management authority) for selected corridors; and support to investment strategies for and capacity 
development of small and medium-sized enterprises in responding to development of regional 
corridors. 
• 
Integrated Economic Corridor Planning 
o Support for the development of an integrated national infrastructure investment strategy identifying 
key priority economic activities and investments for the development of the economic corridors in a 
coordinated way; policies necessary to oversee and implement such a strategy. 
o Harmonization of sectoral data and strategies into an interactive platform reflecting dynamically 
sector priority investments, aggregating datasets relevant to all sectors (a national atlas) and 
providing a monitoring tool for sectors respective developments. 
o Development of legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks required to govern the relevant 
sectors, including development of a National Land Policy. 
o Preparation of a program of activities to facilitate the digital development sector as it relates to 
planning and implementing fiber optic deployment along the targeted corridors, such as a feasibility 
study for a national fiberoptic backbone and policy to guide infrastructure sharing. 
o Preparation of a program of activities to support the fisheries sector along the selected corridors, 
identifying concurrent investments and improving planning for fisheries development, including a 
needs assessment and investment plan for identified fisheries infrastructure. 
o Energy sector planning studies necessary to align infrastructure development along economic 
corridors developments, including conducting a feasibility study for the national power transmission 
backbone. 
o Designing a program of training activities, and provision of targeted training to develop and 
strengthen the human resource capacity of relevant MDAs and institutions, including the transport 
and trade sectors. Under the guidance of the MECC, project will strengthen the environmental and 
social management of the relevant ministries and agencies, including undertaking of a focused 
capacity needs assessment with a costed training plan to build a cadre of environmental and social 
specialists, building basic understanding of social and environmental risk management, establishment 
of procedures and templates for risk management, institutional strengthening in support of the 
creation of an Environment and Social Risk Management Unit under the MECC, conducting regional 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 66 
 
 
and national training workshops, coordination and cooperation with other development partners, and 
a draft road map for the FGS and the associated FMS for establishing and enhancing own country 
environmental and social risk management system. 
 
Component 4: Project Management (US$7.2 million equivalent; of which US$2.2 million from Regional IDA, and 
US$5.0 million from National IDA) 
 
65. 
This component will finance overall project implementation, coordination and management costs of 
the project, including costs associated with a PCU in the Ministry of Public Works, Reconstruction and Housing 
(MPWRH).71 It will strengthen the institutional and human resource capacity of the PCU for project 
implementation, coordination, management, monitoring and evaluation, financial and technical audits and mid-
term and end-project evaluations, environmental and social management, financial management, and 
procurement, and recruiting project staff, through the acquisition of goods, provision of works, technical advisory 
services, training and operating costs. The project will rely as much as possible on local staff, utilizing external 
technical assistance consultants to support but not take responsibility for deliverables.  
 
Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component (US$0) 
 
Following an eligible crisis or emergency, the Borrower may request the World Bank to re-allocate project 
funds to support emergency response and reconstruction. This component would draw from the uncommitted 
resources under the project from other project components to cover emergency response. Prior to the 
implementation of any activities under this component, a Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
Manual and Emergency Action Plan will be prepared and adopted, detailing implementation arrangements for 
the CERC and that will meet the environmental and social requirements as to be agreed in the Emergency Action 
Plan and ESCP.  
 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
 
66. 
The direct beneficiaries of this project will be the ministries within the FGS responsible for infrastructure 
development. The project will develop the underlying studies, data and capacities necessary for government 
authorities to plan for and manage the infrastructure sectors, focused on economic corridor development. As 
such, the staff of MPWRH, MTCA, MPMT, the Ministry of Communications and Technology (MCT), and other 
related authorities will be the focus of the project, and its direct beneficiaries. Technical staff at ministries of public 
works at state level will be indirect beneficiaries, because of expected exposure through technical consultations 
and collaboration in preparing project designs and support to some sectoral analytical assignments.  
 
67. 
Downstream, through the implementation of the project’s outputs, eventual development of economic 
corridors and associated connectivity will lead to benefits for large segment of, if not the entire population of 
the country. More than 2.1 million Somali’s live within 5 km of the economic corridors under consideration for 
design by the project and an additional 8.5 million live in cities which may be connected.72 Transport and trade 
 
71 On occasions, TA may, on an interim basis, be provided directly to beneficiary ministries in order to support their execution of project 
activities in their relevant sectors.  
72 World Bank estimate based on World Pop population distribution (URL: worldpop.org). As outlined above, not all corridors which are 
under consideration will be designed, although the potential number of impacted residents will be accounted for in the prioritization 
methodology for activities under component 1.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 66 
 
 
facilitation could lead to a 6.3 percentage increase in real income for Somalia.73 Connectivity to infrastructure 
services, not only roads, but also electricity and internet, can open the door for residents to expand their 
opportunities for employment, creating service and manufacturing jobs while also boosting the potential market 
for the agricultural goods which already drive the economy. Linking in potential fishing ports and supporting the 
growth of transport and trade services could open the door for a possibly lucrative trade with markets in 
neighboring Ethiopia. 
 
68. 
Integration of Somalia into the wider Horn of Africa will be key to unlocking the potential of regional 
integration. Developing alternatives to Ethiopia’s maritime access through Djibouti, unlocking maritime access to 
Northern Kenya through Somali Ports, facilitating and developing intra-regional and international trade, balancing 
power supply and demand, interconnecting and developing digital markets, supporting job creation and structural 
transformation and removing physical and non-physical barriers to an interconnected region will ultimately drive 
benefits to the entire regional population. 
 
D. Results Chain 
 
69. 
The project is designed to contribute to the overall objective of the Horn of Africa Initiative: to develop 
the HoA sub-region by facilitating regional integration and cooperation among the HoA countries. It contributes 
to the objective of the SOP: enhancing connectivity among the HoA countries and access to seaports; facilitation 
of domestic and regional trade and economic integration, and road safety. Achieving this will require a series of 
investments, addressing gaps in the road, ports, digital, energy, and trade sectors, as well as a host of other 
challenges.  
 
70. 
Although the level of need is great, the scope of the challenge, the fragile context, and Somalia’s nascent 
and weak institutions are not ready to launch such a program, and no pipeline of investment ready projects is 
available. The development of economic corridor infrastructure in Somalia and connectivity thereto, will depend 
upon the creation and capacitation of institutions necessary to govern the various sectors, development of the 
analytical and strategic underpinnings of these sectors, and preparation of a strong pipeline of quality investment 
projects. It is only as such foundations are being put in place that a sustainable infrastructure program can be 
successfully launched. 
 
71. 
While the challenges facing the country in achieving these goals are many, key hurdles include: i) 
fragmented and weak governance, including the legal and regulatory framework of the sectors, a lack of certain 
institutions, a need for clarity of jurisdictional responsibilities, etc.; ii) macro-economic and fiscal considerations 
which impact demand for infrastructure and sustainability, including revenue generation, borrowing capacity, 
consumer confidence, etc.; iii) a lack of technical maturity and capacity of the infrastructure sectors, such as staff 
capabilities, readiness of investments, resilience to natural and man-made disasters, technical specifications and 
standards, and the ability to address the integrated considerations for delivery of projects (safeguards, safety, 
gender, modal integration, traffic management, etc.); iv) poorly coordinated business infrastructure, including 
standardized procurement, business models, legal frameworks, human capacity, etc.; v) prohibitive transport 
prices both for long-distance freight operations and port-city transfers; vi) inefficient cross-border transport chains 
and dominance of informal trade at borders and vii) safety and security, including strategies to address risk 
tolerance, and access to work sites. 
 
73 “Infrastructure and Structural Change in the Horn of Africa”. World Bank. 2021 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 66 
 
 
 
72. 
Tackling these challenges will take decades, and the project is intended to serve as an inflection point, 
building government capacity through two primary channels. It will a) finance the preparation of analytical, and 
feasibility studies and designs of priority projects in a spatially coordinated manner while b) supporting the 
development of the institutional structures and capacity necessary to plan, prepare, execute, and oversee the 
development the infrastructure sector for the medium and long term. Implementation is intended to lay the 
groundwork for follow-on projects which deliver actual infrastructure investments (either regional projects under 
the same SOP, or Somalia specific projects addressing national challenges and priorities). During implementation, 
as these projects have been prepared and financing is identified (by the World Bank or others), it is expected that 
they will begin under separate implementation arrangements.  
 
73. 
Specifically, under components 1 and 2, the project will support the identification and preparation of 
economic corridor projects and help identify local level connectivity and accessibility investments linking the 
identified corridors with the local population and economic opportunities. These components are intended to 
create a coherent and coordinated pipeline of investment ready projects, jumpstarting Somalia’s investment in 
rebuilding its regional connectivity through linked investments designed to be mutually reinforcing. It will also 
address sector analytical gaps to improve the overall readiness for such civil works, including climate resilience 
and support for inclusive economic development. Furthermore, the formulation of these studies will require, as a 
secondary objective, engagement of ministerial staff for capacity development through a learning-by-doing 
approach. 
 
74. 
As the preparation of the economic corridor projects reach readiness, donor partners (including the 
World Bank) are expected to mobilize financing for their implementation. Although the financing of these follow-
on operations is not explicitly part of the project, it is expected that they will launch in parallel to its 
implementation as designs are delivered. This “conveyer belt” of projects and their financing and implementation 
will be a key outcome of the project but are one step after the PDO and results framework due to the many factors 
beyond the scope of the project. 
 
75. 
Under component 3, the project will support the development of the legal, regulatory and institutional 
frameworks needed to govern the trade and transport sectors. By doing so, it will help to lay a groundwork for 
sustainable planning and management of future investments. Such institutions are key to create a vision for long 
term development of the country, to translate such a vision into a coherent series of projects, and to then manage 
and maintain the resulting investments. Component 4 is also intended to support such capacity development by 
nurturing a cadre of expertise within the MPWRH, with a PCU which can remain in place following project close, 
as a foundation for the development of the National Highway Authority in coming years. 
 
76. 
The Project’s Theory of Change is elaborated in Figure 2 below.  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 66 
 
 
Figure 2 - Theory of Change 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 66 
 
 
 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
 
Rationale for World Bank Involvement 
 
77. 
The World Bank’s support will provide value to the FGS in three ways. First, it will provide sectoral 
support to government agencies, leveraging global knowledge and regional expertise with urgently needed 
financing for institutional readiness. Second, it will bring a coherence to the development of the sector, connecting 
and reinforcing the more narrowly focused investments which are being made under ongoing programs financed 
by other development partners (which largely focus on specific road segments and limited scale capacity building). 
Without such an undergirding of institutional capacity, the sustainability of all investments by all partners, both 
ongoing and future is at risk. Finally, the World Bank’s support will create a pipeline of investment ready projects 
which Somali decision makers can use to source financing from all sources, including but not limited to the World 
Bank itself, opening the door for a much larger program than could be possible with a more narrowly focused 
engagement.  
 
Role of Partners 
 
78. 
The World Bank has joined other partners already engaged in Somalia’s infrastructure sectors. The HoA 
Initiative countries requested and received technical support from three development partners in preparing the 
Initiative: the World Bank, the AfDB and the EU. These institutions have continued their engagement with the 
initiative, and at the more local level, are jointly engaged in supporting Somalia’s interface with the region under 
Pillar 1 of the initiative. A joint AfDB/EU project is being launched, supporting Somalia in the preparation of design 
of several road lengths, rehabilitation of a segment of gravel road, and targeted capacity building for MPWRH, 
among other activities. Bilateral partners are engaged within Somalia as well, including from the United Kingdom, 
Germany, Qatar, Türkiye, the United Arab Emirates and others. The project is designed to ensure that investments 
do not overlap, are mutually reinforcing and that the benefits of the capacity building support planned under the 
project will be multiplied by strengthening Government authorities’ ability to plan and implement this wider set 
of activities.  
 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
 
79. 
The project design considers lessons learned from previous World Bank-financed projects in the region, 
including in other fragile, post-conflict settings. Although this will be the first World Bank-financed project to 
focus on transport in Somalia in decades, projects in related sectors are ongoing and have provided valuable 
insights for working in the Somali context and with shared counterparts, including the Somalia Urban Resilience 
Project II (P170922) and the recently closed ICT Sector Support in Somalia Phase II (P152358). The project also 
builds upon the lessons learned from other DPs which have supported Somalia in the infrastructure sectors in 
recent years.  
 
80. 
Experience in rebuilding institutions in countries following conflict was considered. For example, In the 
re-engagement in Liberia, implementation capacities for initial engagements were arranged with a vision towards 
a long-term institutional framework in mind, such as a possible evolution of an implementation unit at the Ministry 
of Public Works to become a future Roads Authority. In Cameroon, the experience related to the Multimodal 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP) (P173119) 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 66 
 
 
Transport Project and the CEMAC Transport-Transit Facilitation Project74 offered critical design insights including 
insights into the development of a security management plan for the project and preparing road designs in 
insecure environments.  
 
81. 
The project’s institutional strengthening approach is based on extensive experience in other World 
Bank supported projects working with the FGS.75 The project’s capacity building activities will be established as 
part of a forward-looking strategy for sectoral development, identified to cumulatively contribute to a long-term 
institutional and sectoral vision to leave behind competencies beyond the life of the project. In particular, the 
project will adopt a hands-on approach, where all possible supporting stakeholders (staff at FGS/FMS level or 
private operators) will learn by doing. To this end, the project will rely as much as possible on local staff, utilizing 
any external consultant to support but not take responsibility for deliverables and leverage competencies in the 
diaspora to benefit from knowledge in Somali. The project will strengthen the staffing of the institutions to 
prepare and deliver project activities, including development of ToRs, and execution of studies. The approach will 
also consider the Somalia fiscal situation and lack of coordination between institutions and will assess carefully 
and pragmatically the needs. Finally, the development of a PCU and the project management support identified 
under Component 3 is intended as an integral aspect of the project’s overall capacity building approach. By 
integrating this coordination unit within the daily operations of MPWRH, and by relying as much as possible on 
local staff, the project seeks to create a core of competency for project management and oversight within this 
ministry which will outlive the project and contribute to the long-term capacity of the infrastructure sector. 
 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
82. 
The project will be implemented by the FGS through the MPWRH with involvement and consultation 
with technical contributions by beneficiary ministries and with the participating FMS on relevant activities.  
Financial management will be conducted by the External Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS) within the MoF.76 
 
83. 
The project’s spatial planning require