 
Document of 
The World Bank 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD4375  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
PROJECT PAPER 
ON A  
PROPOSED ADDITIONAL GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 34.9 MILLION 
(US$50 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
TO THE 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
FOR THE 
SOMALIA CAPACITY ADVANCEMENT, LIVELIHOODS AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP, THROUGH 
DIGITAL UPLIFT (SCALED-UP) PROJECT ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
May 26, 2021 
 
 
 
Finance, Competitiveness, and Innovation Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region  
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
Exchange Rate Effective April 30, 2021 
 
Currency Unit =  Somali Shilling (SOS) 
US$1 = SOS 578.50 
US$1 = SDR 0.70 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 – December 31 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
ACH 
Automated Clearing House  
AF 
Additional Financing 
AfDB 
African Development Bank 
AML 
Anti-Money Laundering 
ATS+ 
Automated Transfer System  
BAU 
Business as Usual 
BDS 
Business Development Service 
BRS 
Business Registration System  
CBS 
Central Bank of Somalia  
CDD 
Customer Due Diligence 
CERC 
Contingent Emergency Response Component 
CERT-SOC 
Computer Emergency Response Team - Security Operations Center  
CFT 
Combating the Financing of Terrorism 
CIP 
Capital Injection Plan 
CISP 
Communications Infrastructure and Services Provider 
COVID-19 
Coronavirus Disease 2019 
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework  
CPRP 
Country Preparedness and Response Plan 
CVS 
Customer Verification System  
DFI 
Development Finance Institution 
DFS 
Digital Financial Service(s) 
DNFBP 
Designated Nonfinancial Businesses and Professions 
DPO 
Data Protection Office 
EEP 
Eligible Expenditure Program  
eKYC 
Electronic KYC  
ERP 
Enterprise Resource Planning  
ESF 
Environmental and Social Framework  
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework  
FACTS 
Financial Accounting Control and Transactions System  
FATF 
Financial Action Task Force  
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia  
FHW 
Female Health Worker 
FI 
Financial Institution 
 
 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMoH 
The Federal Ministry of Health 
FMS 
Federal Member State(s) 
FRC 
Financial Reporting Center  
FT 
Financing of Terrorism  
GBV 
Gender-Based Violence  
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product  
GHG 
Greenhouse Gas 
GRM 
Grievance Redress Mechanism  
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service 
HIPC 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 
HR 
Human Resource 
IAD 
Internal Audit Department  
ICT 
Information Communication Technology 
ID 
Identification 
IDP 
Institutional Development Plan 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
IFRS 
International Financial Reporting Standards 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund  
IPF 
Investment Project Financing  
IT 
Information Technology  
IVA 
Independent Verification Agent  
KYC 
Know Your Customer  
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MDAs 
Ministries, Departments, and Agencies  
MFD 
Maximizing Finance for Development  
ML 
Money Laundering  
MoCI 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry  
MoCT 
Ministry of Communications and Technology 
MoF 
Ministry of Finance 
MPF 
Multi-Partner Fund  
MRIA 
Matter Requiring Immediate Action 
MSMEs 
Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises  
NAPA 
National Adaptation Program of Action  
NCA 
National Communications Authority 
NDP9 
Ninth National Development Plan 
NEC 
National Economic Council 
NGO 
Nongovernmental Organization 
NNDP 
Ninth National Development Plan  
NPV 
Net Present Value  
OAG 
Office of the Accountant General 
ODA 
Official Development Assistance  
OSS 
One-Stop Shop 
PBC 
Performance-Based Condition 
PCM 
Private Capital Mobilization 
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
 
 
PFI 
Participating Financial Institution 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit  
POM 
Project Operations Manual  
PP 
Procurement Plan 
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development  
PSC 
Project Steering Committee  
RBS 
Risk-Based Supervision  
RCRF 
Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project 
RF 
Results Framework 
SCORE 
Somali Core Economic Institutions and Opportunities Program 
SCRP 
Somalia Crisis Recovery Project 
SEA-SH 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment 
SEP 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan  
SICRP 
Somalia Investment Climate Reform Program 
SMEs 
Small and Medium Enterprises  
SPS 
Somalia Payment Switch  
STARS 
Somalia Transaction and Reporting System  
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement  
TA 
Technical Assistance 
ToC 
Theory of Change 
TOR 
Terms of Reference 
UCS 
Use of Country Systems  
ULF 
Unified Licensing Framework  
UN 
United Nations 
UNIDO 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization 
URL 
Uniform Resource Link  
WBG 
World Bank Group  
WBOPCS 
World Bank Operations Policy and Country Services 
WHO 
World Health Organization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Hafez M. H. Ghanem 
Country Director: Keith E. Hansen 
Regional Director: Asad Alam 
Practice Manager: Niraj Verma 
Task Team Leaders: Thilasoni Benjamin Musuku, Asta Bareisaite, Isabella 
Maria Linnea Hayward 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
I. 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING ........................................ 7 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING ......................................................................18 
III. KEY RISKS........................................................................................................................31 
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY ....................................................................................................35 
V. WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS ................................................................................42 
VI. SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES ......................................................................................43 
VII. DETAILED CHANGE(S) ......................................................................................................43 
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING .....................................................................51 
ANNEX I: CBS GOVERNANCE AND FINANCIAL INTEGRITY ....................................................76 
ANNEX II: PBC MATRIX ...........................................................................................................80 
ANNEX III: SUMMARY OF THE CBS PROGRAM ........................................................................93 
ANNEX IV: THEORY OF CHANGE .............................................................................................94 
ANNEX V: CHANGES TO THE RESULTS FRAMEWORK ..............................................................95 
ANNEX VI: CLIMATE CO-BENEFITS ........................................................................................ 100 
ANNEX VII: PRIVATE CAPITAL MOBILIZATION AND MAXIMIZING FINANCE FOR DEVELOPMENT 
-ENABLING ACTIVITIES ......................................................................................................... 103 
ANNEX VIII: WBG COVID-19 COUNTRY PROGRAM RESPONSE NOTE - SOMALIA ................... 105 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769)  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 113 
 
      
 
BASIC INFORMATION – PARENT (Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through 
Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) - P168115) 
 
 
Country 
Product Line 
Team Leader(s) 
Somalia 
IBRD/IDA 
Thilasoni Benjamin Musuku 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Resp CC 
Req CC 
Practice Area (Lead) 
P168115 
Investment Project 
Financing 
EAEF1 (9552) 
AECE2 (6542) 
Finance, Competitiveness and 
Innovation 
 
Implementing Agency: Ministry of Finance, Federal Republic of Somalia 
 ADD FIN TBL1 
Is this a regionally tagged 
project? 
 
No 
 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
Joint Level 
Yes 
Complementary or Interdependent project 
requiring active coordination 
Approval Date 
Closing Date 
Expected 
Guarantee 
Expiration Date 
Original Environmental 
Assessment Category 
Current EA Category 
07-Mar-2019 
30-Jun-2023 
 
Partial Assessment (B) 
Partial Assessment 
(B) 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  P a re n t 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach [MPA] 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[✓] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769)  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 113 
 
 
Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support progress towards increased access to basic digital financial 
and government services targeting entrepreneurship and employment, particularly for women. 
 
Ratings (from Parent ISR) 
 
RATING_DRAFT_NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation 
Latest ISR 
 
30-May-2019 
17-Dec-2019 
18-Jun-2020 
18-Dec-2020 
Progress towards 
achievement of PDO 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Overall Implementation 
Progress (IP) 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
MS 
 
Overall Safeguards 
Rating 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
MS 
 
Overall Risk 
H 
 
H 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Financial Management 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
MS 
 
Project Management 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Procurement 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
MS 
 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
MS 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and 
Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) Additional Financing - P174769) 
 
ADDFIN_TABLE 
Project ID 
Project Name 
Additional Financing Type 
Urgent Need or Capacity 
Constraints 
P174769 
Somalia Capacity 
Advancement, Livelihoods 
and Entrepreneurship, 
through Digital Uplift 
Project (SCALED-UP) 
Scale Up 
Yes 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769)  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 113 
 
Additional Financing 
Financing instrument 
Product line 
Approval Date 
Investment Project 
Financing 
IBRD/IDA 
09-Jun-2021 
Projected Date of Full 
Disbursement 
Bank/IFC Collaboration   
Joint Level 
 
30-Apr-2026 
Yes 
Complementary or 
Interdependent project 
requiring active 
coordination 
 
Is this a regionally tagged project? 
 
No 
 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  C h ild 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[✓] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[✓] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[✓] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
 
 Disbursement Summary (from Parent ISR) 
 
Source of Funds 
Net  
Commitments 
Total Disbursed 
Remaining Balance 
Disbursed 
IBRD 
 
 
 
  
 
 % 
IDA 
  18.00 
   6.26 
  11.99 
    
 
34 % 
Grants 
  13.00 
   2.09 
  10.91 
    
 
16 % 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and 
Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) Additional Financing - P174769) 
  
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769)  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 113 
 
 
 
 
 
P R O JE C T  FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
S U MMA R Y -N e w Fin 1  
SUMMARY (Total Financing) 
 
Current Financing 
Proposed Additional 
Financing 
Total Proposed 
Financing 
Total Project Cost 
31.00 
75.00 
106.00 
Total Financing 
31.00 
75.00 
106.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
18.00 
50.00 
68.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
 
  
DETAILS N e w Fin E n h2- Additional Financing 
Private Sector Investors/Shareholders 
Equity 
Amount 
Debt 
Amount 
                     
      IFI Debt 
50.00 
                     
           IDA (Credit/Grant) 
50.00 
                     
      Commercial Debt 
5.00 
                     
           Guaranteed 
5.00 
                     
      Trust Funds 
20.00 
Total 
0.00  
75.00 
 
 
 Payment/Security Guarantee 
 Total 
0.00 
  
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Guarantee Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
0.00 
50.00 
0.00 
50.00 
National PBA 
0.00 
50.00 
0.00 
50.00 
Total 
0.00 
50.00 
0.00 
50.00 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769)  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 113 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
Does the project require any other Policy waiver(s)? 
[ ✔ ] Yes   [    ] No 
Explanation 
The waiver of the Environmental and Social Framework, the Environmental and Social Directive for Investment 
Project Financing, and the Directive on Addressing Risks and Impacts on Disadvantaged or Vulnerable Individuals or 
Groups to prepare scale-up AF was sought from OPCS VP. 
Has the waiver(s) been endorsed or approved by Bank Management? 
Approved by Management  [✔]              Endorsed by Management for Board Approval [  ]                No [  ] 
Explanation 
Approval was obtained from OPCS VP on September 11, 2020 
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation 
 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Digital Development 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
PROJECT TEAM 
 
Bank Staff 
Name 
Role 
Specialization 
Unit 
Thilasoni Benjamin 
Team Leader (ADM 
TTL, Senior Financial Sector 
EAEF1 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769)  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 113 
 
Musuku 
Responsible) 
Specialist 
Asta Bareisaite 
Team Leader 
Co-TTL, Senior Private Sector 
Specialist 
EAEF1 
Francis Akolu Muthuiya 
Procurement Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Sr. Procurement Specialist 
EAERU 
Leonard Mutuku Matheka 
Financial Management 
Specialist (ADM Responsible) 
Sr. FM Specialist 
EAEG1 
Raymond Simon Maina 
Kirwa 
Social Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Social Specialist 
SAES2 
Tracy Hart 
Environmental Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Environmental Safeguards 
Specialist 
SENDR 
Alan G. Carroll 
Team Member 
Consultant 
IECT1 
Anat Lewin 
Team Member 
Senior Digital Development 
Specialist 
IDD04 
Anna Zita Metz 
Team Member 
Program Officer 
IDD03 
Catherine Mclennan Highet Team Member 
Digital Development 
Consultant 
EFICG 
Dilip Kumar Prusty Chinari 
Team Member 
Finance Analyst 
WFACS 
Elizabeth Mumbi Kibaki 
Team Member 
Business registration 
CAFA1 
Eugenia Nafula Konya 
Team Member 
Team Assistant 
AEMSO 
Haroub Ahmed Haroub 
Social Specialist 
Social Safeguards Specialist 
SAEE2 
Isabella Maria Linnea 
Hayward 
Team Member 
Co-TTL, Digital Development 
Specialist 
IDD04 
Jean O Owino 
Team Member 
Finance Officer 
WFACS 
Juan Andres Cartwright 
Ramon 
Team Member 
Financial Sector Consultant 
EAEF1 
Peggy Ayako Kwendo 
Team Member 
Team assistant 
AEMSO 
Shiny Jaison 
Team Member 
Operations Assistant 
EAEF1 
Taneem Ahad 
Team Member 
Business registration 
CAFA1 
Yara Quiros Soto 
Team Member 
Sr. Financial Specialist 
EFNFS 
 
Extended Team 
Name 
Title 
Organization 
Location 
   
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 113 
 
 
 
 
 
I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
A. Summary 
1. 
The Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods, and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift 
Project (SCALED-UP) (P168115) has made meaningful progress since effectiveness and is playing a 
central role in strengthening the capacity of the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) to respond to the 
challenges brought by the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. Overall, the parent project 
has been rated ‘Satisfactory’ in relation to achievement of the Project Development Objective (PDO) and 
‘Moderately Satisfactory’ for Implementation Progress (IP). At the beginning of May 2021, the total 
project disbursement stood at US$8.2 million, representing 27 percent of the total available resources or 
44 percent after factoring in US$5.5 million of additional commitments 1. With 44 percent of total project 
disbursement and commitments at 19 months since effectiveness, all project components are broadly in 
line with the projections and on course to utilize 100 percent of the current budget allocations. 
2. 
This project paper seeks the approval of the Executive Directors for an additional financing (AF) 
in the amount of US$50 million for SCALED-UP, financed from the IDA resources. In addition, this project 
paper seeks the approval of the Regional Vice President for an additional US$20 million of the Somalia 
Multi-Partner Fund (MPF) trust fund grant (TF0B5774)2. The AF is requested to scale up the parent project 
activities to aid the FGS in supporting resilient recovery of households and businesses affected by the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Specifically, the AF aims to leverage the parent project’s platform for institution 
strengthening and enhancing service delivery to enable over 5,000 micro, small, and medium enterprises 
(MSMEs) to access finance to build back better; formalize another 5,000 firms through the business 
registry; support over 250,000 women to access financial transaction accounts; and support 3 million 
Somali residents to obtain unique identification (ID) numbers. The AF will: 
(a) Leverage two financing windows of the MSME financing facility established under the parent 
project, which have already proven to be effective in the expansion of access to finance for 
MSMEs, to mitigate vulnerable but viable firms’ liquidity shortages caused by the pandemic. 
The Somali firms’ already low access to finance has been exacerbated by the COVID-19 
pandemic, leaving a large unmet market demand in the real economy. In effect, about 63 
percent of firms currently find it difficult to access credit. 3 The AF will help mitigate the 
liquidity shortages of viable firms. This will in turn play a crucial role in preserving numerous 
jobs and enabling a faster path to resilient recovery of communities and businesses.  
 
1 Expected to be disbursed by Q1 FY22, 60 percent of which is in commitments under Subcomponent 1.1 supporting the Central 
Bank of Somalia. 
2 Additional US$5 million private capital mobilized (PCM) is expected under sub-component 2.1. This amount is only reflected in 
the datasheet on page 4 which captures the expected PCM, and not in the datasheet on pages 44-45. More details on the PCM 
are provided in the Annex VII.  
3 World Bank Group (WBG) and United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). Coronavirus and the Private Sector 
in Somalia: Results from the COVID-19-focused Enterprise Survey - Round 2. March 2021. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 113 
 
(b) Deepen the parent project’s reforms to accelerate outcomes and the transformational 
results needed to sharpen the FGS’ response to the COVID-19 pandemic and other structural 
challenges to support business continuity and a resilient recovery. More than ever, COVID-
19 has led to the realization of the importance of driving the reform benefits related to 
integrity and proper functioning of financial markets and digital systems. These are essential 
to the Government’s mitigation of COVID-19 impacts on communities and businesses, but 
the FGS’ ability to finance the additional investment needed to accelerate reforms and 
operationalize digital infrastructure and platforms is constrained because of reduced fiscal 
revenues during the pandemic. To this end, the AF will finance reforms needed to roll out 
the digital ID in Somalia, support the Central Bank of Somalia (CBS) to implement its Strategic 
Plan (2020–2024) to become a policy-oriented central bank, expand the Government’s 
digital capabilities, and scale up the provision of digital services to individuals and 
businesses, such as online business registration. Through scaling up of the parent project, 
the AF  attempts to  ensure business continuity and remote service delivery, thus 
underpinning a resilient recovery and safeguarding sustainable livelihoods. 
3. 
The AF is closely aligned with the parent project’s structure and components with no new 
safeguards policy triggered. The project components, implementation arrangements, and target 
beneficiaries will remain unchanged, the existing implementing arrangements, safeguards mechanisms, 
and financial reporting mechanisms in place will continue to ensure sound implementation.  
4. 
The AF also includes a restructuring, featuring (a) updates to the Results Framework (RF) to 
reflect an updated assessment and scaling up of the parent project; (b) changes in disbursement 
arrangements to introduce performance-based conditions (PBCs) for activities that support the CBS given 
the growing capacity and the need to incentivize critical financial sector reforms, and scaled up and 
extended offering by Gargaara; (c) changes in disbursement projections; (d) changes to costs pursuant to 
the AF; (e) updated covenants; and (f) an extension of the project closing date by 30 months to December 
31, 2025. The PDO remains unchanged and achievable. 
5. 
To enable an urgent response in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, the World Bank has invoked 
paragraph 12 of the Investment Project Financing (IPF) policy to use condensed procedures for 
processing in case of an urgent need of assistance due to a natural or man-made disaster or conflict. 
These flexibilities 4 in project preparation allowed the World Bank management to process the AF with a 
condensed process and expedite the flow of necessary financing to ensure that Somalis are supported 
during the crisis. Additionally, in line with its COVID-19-specific risk considerations, the World Bank 
approved a waiver of the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), the Environmental and Social 
Directive for IPF, and the Directive on Addressing Risks and Impacts on Disadvantaged or Vulnerable 
Individuals or Groups, allowing the AF to continue to apply the safeguards policies that were in use when 
the parent project was prepared.  
 
 
4 Condensed procedures allow for (i) consolidating stages of project identification, preparation and appraisal; (ii) taking the 
decision to authorize negotiations after a single consolidated review of a complete negotiations package; and (iii) accelerating 
business standards with shorter turnaround times. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 113 
 
B. Background 
6. 
SCALED-UP is a US$31 million operation 5 that was approved on March 7, 2019, and became 
effective on August 8, 2019. The PDO is to support progress toward increased access to basic digital 
financial and government services targeting entrepreneurship and employment, particularly for women. 
The project is designed around three mutually reinforcing components: Component 1: Strengthening 
Institutions (US$7 million equivalent), Component 2: Enabling Financial and Digital Services (US$20 million 
equivalent), and Component 3: Project Management and Coordination (US$4 million equivalent) (see box 
1 for details). 
Box 1. Description of the SCALED-UP Parent Project 
Component 1: Strengthening Institutions (US$7 million equivalent) is focused on supporting core government 
functions and services that play a key role in enabling economic opportunities for individuals and businesses, 
through strengthening governance, institutional effectiveness, efficiency, and sustainability. This is a reform area 
requiring progress across multiple ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs) in several areas. This component 
has primarily provided support to the, (a) CBS on improving regulations and supervising financial institutions (FIs), 
promoting efficient financial intermediation and strengthening policies and strategies for digital financial services 
(DFS), and expanding financial access; (b) Financial Reporting Center (FRC) on enhancing its understanding of 
Somalia’s anti-money laundering/combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) risks, analyzing financial 
intelligence, and disseminating reports to law enforcement agencies as appropriate; (c) Ministry of 
Communications and Technology (MoCT)6/National Communications Authority (NCA) to strengthen policy 
development and effective regulation of the information and communication technology (ICT) sector; and (d) FGS 
to create the legislative and institutional enabling environment for the new foundational digital ID system, 
including the setup and operationalization of a new independent ID Authority.  
Component 2: Enabling Financial and Digital Services (US$20 million equivalent) focuses on increasing 
individuals’ and businesses’ access to services that expand economic opportunities and help restore resilience in 
a gender-sensitive manner. Under this component, the project supports sustainable and digitally enabled 
mechanisms for service delivery, including (a) the establishment and management of an MSME financing facility 
(Gargaara) as a dedicated apex institution providing financing to bank and non-bank FIs to reach MSMEs and large 
firms; (b) enrollment of at least 1 million registrants in a new foundational digital ID system, including dedicated 
support for outreach to poor and marginalized groups, and the use of the digital ID for increased financial access; 
(c) support for Government digital payments, including the construction of interoperable retail payments services, 
and integrated digital Government services; and (d) e-business registration services for small and medium 
enterprises (SMEs) through the operationalization of a one-stop shop (OSS). 
Component 3: Project Management and Coordination (US$4 million equivalent) focuses on funding project 
management by a single Project Implementation Unit (PIU) anchored in the Ministry of Finance (MoF) that 
coordinates closely with all relevant MDAs across the FGS and Federal Member States (FMS). 
7. 
While the Government’s reform agenda supported by SCALED-UP and other IDA/MPF 
development projects has made considerable progress, the COVID-19 pandemic has deepened the 
challenges to be addressed by the project. The pandemic comes at a time when the country is navigating 
a narrow path away from fragility. Since 2012, the country has managed to make sustained progress and 
 
5 With financing from IDA’s Pre-Arrears Clearance Grant facility and the MPF (IDA: SDR 12.9 million [US$18 million equivalent] 
and MPF: US$13 million). 
6 Formerly known as the Ministry of Posts, Telecommunications, and Technology. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 113 
 
demonstrated a strong track record of implementing wide-ranging institutional and economic reforms, as 
evidenced by Somalia reaching the Decision Point under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 
(HIPC) initiative in March 2020. However, the COVID-19 pandemic has severely affected the Somali 
economy that was already shaken by an infestation of desert locusts and reoccurring climate change-
related shocks (floods and droughts). 
8. 
The private sector, which has been a major driver of economic growth and employment 
generation in Somalia, is being adversely affected by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic in several ways. 
These include, but are not limited to, curfews and restrictions that disrupted commercial operations, 
increased business vulnerabilities, disruptions to key supply chains, closed borders, decreased capital and 
venture inflows, and diminished access to finance. According to Round 1 of the Somalia COVID-19 
Enterprise Survey, 7 75 percent of firms saw a decline in sales and 71 percent experienced a decrease in 
the supply of needed inputs by mid-2020. 8 Round 2 of the same survey suggests that about 52 percent 
and 44 percent of firms remain in these respective situations in early 2021. 9 Accordingly, about 37 percent 
of firms remain closed, 46 percent of firms are still decreasing their total number of permanent workers, 
and 54 percent of firms are still reducing the wages and salaries of their staff. 10  
9. 
The financial health of Somali firms is also affected, with 49 percent of firms still facing liquidity 
and cash flow challenges and 80 percent of firms having to delay payments to their service providers 
and tax authorities.11 Many of these firms remain viable with timely liquidity support, to tide over the 
economic slowdown due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and consequently preserve previous institutional, 
social, and financial capital and jobs. 
10. 
While Somalia’s financial sector remains stable, the COVID-19 pandemic has increased sector 
risks and vulnerabilities and diminished its already low capacity to expand access to finance to MSMEs, 
particularly women and women entrepreneurs. The total capital-to-assets ratio of the consolidated 
commercial banking system in December 2020 was 12.2 percent, and the loan-to-deposits ratio was 26.7 
percent. 12 Furthermore, the loan portfolio was still healthy in December 2020, with a nonperforming loan 
ratio of 4.0 percent. 13 However, according to Round 2 of the Somalia COVID-19 Enterprise Survey, 
although there have been some signs of recovery in the private sector economy, 14 55 percent of firms in 
the country anticipate falling in arrears on their outstanding liabilities in the absence of additional 
support. 15 Given these perceptions of greater vulnerability due to the COVID-19 pandemic, participating 
 
7 There have been two rounds of the COVID-19 Enterprise Survey so far. Round 1 interviewed 550 formally registered businesses 
between June 14 and July 30, 2020. Round 2 interviewed 494 of the 550 firms interviewed in Round 1, between December 15, 
2020, and January 30, 2021. One more round of data collection will be performed in Q1 FY22. 
8 WBG and UNIDO. 2020. Coronavirus and the Private Sector in Somalia: Results from the COVID-19-focused Enterprise Survey - 
Round 1. September 2020. 
9 WBG and UNIDO. 2021. Coronavirus and the Private Sector in Somalia: Results from the COVID-19-focused Enterprise Survey - 
Round 2. March 2021. 
10 WBG and UNIDO 2021. 
11 Ibid. 
12 CBS - Commercial Banks Consolidated Data. 
13 Ibid. 
14 Although 50 percent of firms still saw a reduction in sales by December 2020, this is an improvement from the 75 percent of 
firms that had seen a decrease in the same month in 2019. Relatedly, only 49 percent of firms in Somalia were facing liquidity 
challenges by December 2020 in comparison to 90 percent of firms in December 2019. 
15 WBG and UNIDO 2021. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 113 
 
financial institutions (PFIs) have retrenched their outreach efforts—especially with micro and small 
businesses. 16 Accordingly, financial intermediation in the Somali credit market has diminished from its 
already modest position—private sector credit in Somalia by November 2020 was just over 4 percent of 
gross domestic product (GDP), compared to an average of 45 percent of GDP in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
Furthermore, the little that is being lent remains heavily concentrated on short-term trade finance and 
relatively large loans, whose weight in the total portfolio of FIs increased in 2020 compared to 2019.17 
Thus, by early 2021, about 63 percent of firms found access to credit difficult. 18 This leaves a large unmet 
market demand for financing in the real economy. Access to credit is one of the two most desired COVID-
19 support options for private enterprises, and the proportion of firms that desire support to access new 
credit has in effect tripled between mid-2020 and early 2021. Additionally, about 49 percent of micro 
firms and 34 percent of non-micro firms say that they depend on bank financing to bridge liquidity 
shortages. 19 
11. 
Furthermore, the pandemic and the need for social distancing has increased reliance on DFS, 
digital communications, and service platforms, as a means of ensuring remote and uninterrupted access 
to information, financial assistance, and critical public and private services. In this context, ensuring 
resilience of DFS and communication services remains paramount. While regulatory capacity has 
increased under the parent project, there is a need for additional support at this critical juncture to ensure 
business continuity and to enable key sector institutions to develop the necessary capacity to meet the 
needs of Somalia’s transitioning economy, complicated further by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The demand for mobile communication and mobile money services is expected to increase, as it has in 
connection with past crises, which has helped propel one of the highest rates of mobile money usage 
among adults in Africa (80 percent). 20 While many United Nations (UN) agencies and nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs) are increasingly using mobile payment channels to deliver front-line services, the 
FGS’ use is still limited to salary payments through transaction accounts held at licensed banks. In this 
context, further system integration with a verifiable unique ID for transaction account owners is viewed 
as instrumental to scale up financial inclusion and wider application to new use cases such as social 
protection.  
12. 
While several digital systems have been introduced by the Government, its digital services 
capabilities remain nascent and vulnerable in the absence of foundational digital infrastructure and 
shared platforms that can accelerate readiness, delivery, security, and resilience of basic digital 
government services. A handful of back-end systems have been/are being introduced to support core 
public sector functions critical to basic service delivery, but few of these systems leverage shared 
infrastructure and platforms, which allow systems to be readily integrated or scaled to enable more 
effective delivery of digital services facing individuals and businesses. The introduction of foundational 
infrastructure and platforms enabling delivery of digital ID services is also faced with political economy 
challenges and will require not just further strengthening of technical readiness and capabilities but also 
consensus building across FMS to ensure broad-based access to ID services across the country. 
 
16 Conversations by the World Bank task team with Gargaara PFIs during the SCALED-UP AF pre-appraisal mission during 
January/February 2021. 
17 WBG - Somalia Economic Update. June 2020. 
18 WBG and UNIDO 2021. 
19 Ibid. 
20 World Bank. 2018. Second Wave of Mobile Money Research - Use of Mobile Money during the Drought. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 113 
 
Meanwhile, experience suggests that remote working, in connection with COVID-19, has increased the 
risk of cybersecurity incidents and data breaches, highlighting the need for adequate safeguards, but 
related frameworks are still absent in Somalia. 
13. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has also increased the urgency of resolution of financial integrity issues 
and de-risking. Reliance on remittance flows and demand for social and humanitarian assistance have 
intensified due to the pandemic. However, effective payment delivery is constrained by the lack of reliable 
means to authenticate recipients or ensure their uniqueness within and across databases (that is, 
continued reliance on predominantly manual, low-assurance, and informal identification processes). 
Recent high-profile international reports have highlighted significant gaps in Somalia’s AML/CFT system, 
including persistent risks of money laundering (ML) and financing of terrorism (FT). Without a trusted and 
universally accessible digital ID system, meeting international know your customer (KYC) and AML/CFT 
requirements remains a challenge for financial service providers operating in Somalia. 
14. 
The role of the CBS remains critical in the state reconstruction and stabilization of the financial 
sector and facilitation of remittances in a fragile environment to mitigate COVID-19 impact. The CBS 
needs to diversify transmittal channels for Official Development Assistance (ODA) and extend Use of 
Country Systems (UCS) to FMS to mitigate overreliance on a few transmittal channels considering 
disruptions associated with the pandemic. The CBS continues to benefit from cooperating partners’ 
support including the World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF), and United States Treasury, in 
boosting central bank governance and FI supervision and examination. The CBS operation systems and FI 
supervisory oversight capacities have been strengthened over the recent years.21 Channeling of ODA 
through the CBS as a fiscal agent is expected to further contribute to federal state formation by extending 
UCS to the FMS level. The legal foundations for the CBS needed to underpin secure and stable transmittal 
channels are broadly in line with best practices and the internal governance arrangements are developing. 
However, the CBS needs to urgently strengthen key central banking functions that are critical to boosting 
financial sector integrity by (a) developing and maintaining good working knowledge of the FIs being 
supervised and the sorts of risks they are assuming in selected areas, particularly corporate governance, 
corporate structure, and risk management, and (b) building trust and public confidence in central bank 
supervisory policies through financial and nonfinancial disclosures of risk in supervised FIs, particularly ML 
and FT risks. 22  
C. Status of the Parent Project 
15. 
SCALED-UP has made meaningful progress since effectiveness and is playing a central role in 
strengthening the FGS’ capacity to respond to the challenges brought by the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Overall, the parent project has been rated ‘Satisfactory’ in relation to achievement of the PDO and 
‘Moderately Satisfactory’ for Implementation Progress (IP). At the beginning of May 2021, the total 
project disbursement stood at US$8.2 million, representing 27 percent of the total available resources or 
44 percent after factoring in US$5.5 million of commitments which are expected to be disbursed by Q1 
FY22. With 44 percent of total project disbursement and commitments at 19 months since effectiveness, 
 
21 The Somali Core Economic Institutions and Opportunities Program (SCORE) and SCALED-UP supported the CBS to strengthen 
FI supervision and examination, banking operations, and financial governance controls and accounting using an integrated core 
banking and accounting technology solution called the Financial Accounting Control and Transactions System (FACTS). 
22 See annex I for a discussion on central bank governance and financial integrity. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 113 
 
all project components are broadly in line with the projections and are on course to utilize 100 percent of 
the current budget allocations. 
16. 
Under Component 1, the project has made significant headway in strengthening government 
institutions critical for efficient financial and digital service delivery. While experiencing some delays 
due to COVID-19, implementation progress of activities to support capacity building at the CBS and FRC 
has been satisfactory. Building on the foundations laid under Somali Core Economic Institutions and 
Opportunities Program (SCORE) (P152241), 23 the project is providing technical and financial support to 
the CBS to strengthen critical systems for FIs’ regulation and supervision and promoting efficient financial 
intermediation. These efforts are focused on transforming the CBS from a fiscal agent to a policy-
orientated institution based on independence, responsibility, accountability, and transparency. The 
progress made on strengthening national payment systems is noteworthy. With successful deployment 
of a cloud computing hosting solution in September 2020 under SCORE for the Somalia Transaction and 
Reporting System (STARS)24 and the Somalia Payment Switch (SPS), the national payment system initiative 
has now entered the ‘go live’ preparations phase expected by the end of June 2021. 25 The CBS has also 
developed a reorganization strategy for a rapid shift toward policy that was approved by the CBS board. 
The CBS reorganization program, which is transitional and incremental in nature, is aimed at laying the 
foundation toward CBS strategic, effective, and efficient resource allocation, further positioning the role 
of the CBS as a fiscal agent across the country. SCALED-UP has also made progress in strengthening the 
FRC by providing capacity-building activities and supporting the completion of the national risk 
assessment as well as providing the necessary infrastructure to strengthen financial sector integrity. 26 
17. 
With the project’s support, slow but steady progress has also been made with respect to 
boosting the Government’s digital communications regulatory capacity. In July 2020, the NCA Board of 
Directors approved the main licensing category under the new Unified Licensing Framework, a 
communications infrastructure and services provider (CISP) license. Four out of the six main incumbent 
operators have been issued CISP licenses under Somalia’s new Unified Licensing Framework, with a fifth 
currently pending. These developments have also been catalytic for regulatory progress on the mobile 
money side, where Hormuud’s CISP license allowed it to subsequently obtain Somalia’s first mobile money 
license in March 2021. Finally, in parallel with the parent project, the World Bank has facilitated in-kind 
support for a cybersecurity maturity model assessment, which has helped the MoCT identify gaps in 
Somalia’s cybersecurity ecosystem that need to be addressed. 
18. 
Work on building the legal and institutional foundations for the digital ID system has progressed 
as well, although important gaps remain in the enabling legislative framework and implementation 
arrangements for the infrastructure ID are still to be defined. A bill to establish the ID Authority was 
 
23 The previous World Bank flagship project on financial and private sector development in Somalia from May 2016 to September 
2020. 
24 Which consists of an Automated Transfer System (ATS+) solution integrating functionality of a Real Time Gross Settlement 
System  and an Automated Clearing House (ACH), along with Instant Funds Transfer. 
25 As of March 2021, the telecommunication networks and modular tier 3 data center have been deployed, and a private secure 
data exchange network between the CBS and participant FIs is established. 
26 The parent project is supporting the rollout of GoAML, a fully integrated software solution developed for use by financial 
intelligence units and is one of the strategic responses to financial crime by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. This is 
expected to go live imminently. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 113 
 
passed in Parliament and signed by the President in December 2020. The newly established ID Authority 
was provided with a budget to cover its operating costs and a core team of local staff has been hired. A 
consulting firm was onboarded in February 2021 to support the design of a fully inclusive outreach and 
enrollment strategy for the digital ID system. The procurement of legal and technical advisory firms to 
support the drafting of the enabling legislation and the planning, procurement, and deployment of the 
system’s technical infrastructure and technical capacity have not yet taken place. The scope of the 
Government of Pakistan’s engagement in supporting the digital ID infrastructure is yet to be determined, 
but no financing or material support is expected in the short term. By providing the necessary resources 
to the FGS to put in place a robust technical infrastructure to underpin registration, identity management, 
and authentication services, the AF presents the opportunity to accelerate the operationalization of a 
digital ID system, including the establishment of the needed enabling legal and institutional 
underpinnings. The foundational digital ID system is expected to serve as a pillar for future resilience and 
crisis response, by strengthening financial inclusion and financial sector integrity, as well as enabling more 
efficient delivery of social assistance and basic services, including health care and future vaccination 
efforts. Additional support for enrollment will enable a substantial scale-up of the parent project’s target 
related to the number of people with unique and verifiable ID credentials during the project duration.  
19. 
Under Component 2, the project has made great strides to set up and operationalize 
mechanisms to increase access to financial and digital government services. The need to accelerate the 
provision of these critical services has been further highlighted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.  
20. 
Gargaara Company Limited, the implementing entity for the US$15 million MSME financing 
facility, is fully operational, with three PFIs lending to Somali firms. Gargaara is the first apex MSME 
financing facility in Somalia, serving as a platform to crowd-in private capital and foster financial sector 
development and financial inclusion in the country. It has been operational since April 2019 as a 
freestanding autonomous institution with its own record of accomplishment, board of directors, and 
management. As of June 2020, three PFIs were onboarded out of the five expressions of interests received 
from prospective PFIs in November 2019. With the first disbursements made in June 2020 to Somali 
MSMEs in productive sectors, in March 2021 Gargaara reported that a total of US$2.9 million was 
disbursed to 134 MSMEs, and another US$1.1 million is in the pipeline to help firms address liquidity 
constraints in the COVID-19 environment. It thus plays a transformational role to facilitate the adoption 
of traditional lending by Somali FIs and create sufficient scale of market-based funding for MSMEs in 
productive sectors, which have difficulties in accessing finance and are crucial for Somalia’s growth and 
job creation. 
21. 
The project has also shown satisfactory progress in advancing the rollout of digital government 
services, including the operationalization of full functionality of the online business registration system 
(BRS) and support to the Office of the Accountant General (OAG). The pilot phase of the rollout of full 
BRS functionality in Mogadishu saw the submission of 620 applications through the system and the 
registration and issuance of licenses to 150 businesses as of March 23, 2021. 27 Subject to completion of 
the prelaunch engagement with key stakeholders and contingent upon the COVID-19 situation, it is 
 
27 The BRS has also been supported through the International Finance Corporation (IFC) Somalia Investment Climate Reform 
Program (SICRP), and SCORE. SICRP and SCORE provided capacity support to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MoCI) and 
this increased capacity to operate the BRS and contributed to other priorities for the MoCI under the parent project. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 113 
 
expected that an enhanced system with various new features (for example, digital payment capability and 
business licensing functionalities) will go live by July 2021. The launch of the online BRS is a critical 
milestone that will enable access to a centralized information service to verify the identity of the beneficial 
owners of all legal entities operating in Somalia and will thus lower transaction costs, improve transaction 
traceability, and facilitate implementation of effective AML/CFT measures by financial service providers. 
Online business registration processes will also help Somalia improve its business environment by 
lowering transaction costs and strengthen the FGS’ revenue collection from business registration. 
Furthermore, SCALED-UP is supporting the deployment of an electronic document management system 
for accountable documents to aid workflows, data analytics, financial control, and cash management at 
the OAG. This will enable secure and transparent government-to-person and government-to-business 
digital government payments and vice versa to, among others, facilitate cash management and planning, 
internal control and compliance, treasury and payroll management, public sector accounting and 
reporting, and interoperability between the Somalia Financial Management Information System and the 
CBS core banking system.  
22. 
Under Component 3, the project has established the organizational arrangements necessary to 
support project implementation. A functioning PIU has been established to implement the project and is 
anchored in the MoF in Mogadishu. The PIU is responsible for day-to-day project management and 
coordination, working closely with MDAs covering the project target areas. The PIU is currently staffed 
with a financial management (FM) specialist, a safeguards specialist, a procurement specialist, and an 
information technology (IT) systems procurement consultant. The recruitment for a new PIU coordinator 
for the parent project is currently ongoing and expected to be completed by June 2021, with acting 
arrangements currently in place for the position. 28 The project also has a well-functioning Project Steering 
Committee (PSC) comprising representatives of the beneficiary MDAs. The PSC meets regularly to 
coordinate and oversee the implementation of activities, with attention to sequencing and timing issues, 
as well as ensuring effective stakeholder consultations and engagements. A project-level grievance 
redress mechanism (GRM) has been set up to enable systematic handling of project-related complaints 
and grievances. Whereas the GRM has been operational over the life of the parent project, there have 
been some gaps in its effective and timely uptake, processing and resolution of project-related complaints 
and grievances 29. A monitoring agent has been brought onboard in Somalia, in view of COVID-19 travel 
restrictions that have limited the task team’s ability to conduct meetings in Mogadishu. 30  
D. Rationale for AF 
23. 
Designed as a COVID-19 relief and recovery operation, the SCALED-UP AF responds to a request 
from the FGS made in May 2020 to scale up existing activities to (a) expand access to finance for MSMEs 
and (b) accelerate critical reform and capacity-building initiatives needed to underpin a resilient recovery 
and safeguard sustainable livelihoods, particularly among women and women-owned businesses. As the 
project components and implementation arrangements needed to respond to this request are materially 
 
28 The ongoing recruitment for the replacement has experienced some delay due to COVID-19 and the political situation in 
Somalia. In the meantime, the PIU FM specialist is successfully fulfilling the role of the acting PIU coordinator. 
29 These gaps related to the systematic dissemination of information on the availability and the functionality of the GRM over 
the various levels of project implementation. 
30 The monitoring agent is acting as an added layer of capacity to undertake implementation review, monitoring, and reporting 
on all performance aspects of SCALED-UP in the field, with particular focus on Gargaara. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 113 
 
the same as those under the SCALED-UP parent project, this AF enables a swifter response than preparing 
a new project and helps accelerate the Government’s COVID-19 response activities. The AF will scale up 
the parent project activities to ensure continuity, timeliness, and effectiveness of the response to COVID-
19. 
24. 
More specifically, activities to be funded under each component through the AF aim to support 
COVID-19 response and recovery through the following mechanisms: 
• 
Under Component 1 (Strengthening Institutions). The AF will provide scale-up support to 
select project beneficiaries to deepen and accelerate reforms needed to sharpen and 
strengthen the Government’s COVID-19 response and recovery. This includes introduction 
of PBCs to incentivize critical central bank and financial sector reforms to secure stable 
transmittal channels for international remittances, private capital, and ODA. The use of PBC 
financing with this AF is supported by the need to speed CBS achievement of policy 
outcomes of reorganization by influencing reform prioritization and strategic resource 
allocation across core central banking functions, promoting institutional effectiveness in 
securing transmittal channels, and promoting financial market integrity, contributing to 
greater financial stability. To complement activities under component 2, the AF will also 
support institutional, strategic, legal, and regulatory work streams related to enabling rapid 
scale-up of DFS delivery by FIs. Government digital services will also be supported in aid of 
remote service delivery in the context of COVID-19. The scale-up of public digital services 
will focus on areas such as requisite safeguards, including data protection and cybersecurity, 
and support for a common approach to the rollout of shared public digital infrastructure and 
platforms to be used by the government digital ID.  
• 
Under Component 2 (Enabling Financial and Digital Services). The AF will support scale-up 
activities focusing on individuals’ and businesses’ recovery and resilience. Accordingly, the 
AF will support the development of sustainable and digitally enabled mechanisms for 
expanding access to financial and digital services to mitigate COVID-19 impacts on 
communities and businesses and to enhance readiness to respond in the face of future 
crises. To achieve this, data safeguards and digital service enabling frameworks (financed 
under component 1) will be operationalized, and the rollout of shared public digital 
infrastructure and platforms underpinning the provision of these services will be supported. 
Relatedly, the AF will support the scale-up of the number of people who have been enrolled 
in the ID system and have received the unique ID credential to 3 million, from the 1 million 
targeted under the parent project. To help vulnerable but viable businesses to mitigate the 
impact of COVID-19 on operations, employment, and sales, the AF will support the scale-up 
of the two Gargaara financing windows (micro and small loans window and large loans 
window). The project will also support the outreach by sound FIs to micro and small firms in 
productive sectors with a special focus on women-led and women-managed enterprises. In 
addition, targeted MSMEs will also be eligible for matching grants for business development 
services (BDS) to help mitigate COVID-19 impacts and strengthen their loan applications. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 113 
 
• 
Under Component 3 (Project Management and Coordination). The project’s management 
and coordination arrangements will be scaled up to ensure appropriate implementation of 
the AF in the context of COVID-19 restrictions.  
25. 
The proposed AF is also in line with the World Bank Group (WBG) COVID-19 Crisis Response 
Approach Paper: ‘Saving Lives, Scaling-up Impact and Getting Back on Track’. The AF aims to alleviate 
the COVID-19 impact on MSMEs and strengthen the FGS’ core institutions and digital initiatives 
underpinning the provision of digital financial and government services. Accordingly, the activities under 
the project fall under the relief and resilient recovery stages, as outlined in the Approach Paper, and will 
contribute mainly to Pillar 2: Protecting Poor and Vulnerable People; Pillar 3: Ensuring Sustainable 
Business Growth and Job Creation; and Pillar 4: Strengthening Policies, Institutions, and Investments for 
Rebuilding Better. 31 The AF’s activities will lay the groundwork for building back better, through 
improvements to financial and digital infrastructure, by supporting the FGS institutions that are key to the 
provision of services enabling economic opportunities and providing technical assistance (TA) to PFIs, 
which will help enhance resilience to similar shocks. Finally, the project will crowd-in investment capital 
from private sector sources through the apex institution established by the parent project including the 
lines of credit, risk-sharing facility, and additional development finance institution (DFI) capital mobilized, 
thereby releasing some of the FGS’ constrained fiscal resources to invest in building back better. 
26. 
This AF allows SCALED-UP to continue to deliver these activities in alignment with the Country 
Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY19–FY22). The AF project is anchored under the Somalia CPF (for FY19–
FY22), approved by the Board in September 2018 (Report No. 124734-SO), and its Focus Area 2 (Restoring 
Economic Resilience and Opportunities). In response to COVID-19, the WBG reprioritized the FY20 and 
FY21 pipelines to bring forward high-priority relief and recovery efforts 32. More specifically, in line with 
the parent project, the AF will contribute to two higher-level objectives—expanding the use of digital and 
financial services and strengthening regulatory institutions and market infrastructure. This latter CPF 
objective also relates directly to Somalia’s Ninth National Development Plan (NDP9), which sets out the 
country’s priorities for national recovery and development for 2020–2024, particularly on actions to 
address constraints faced by MSMEs. NDP9’s Pillar 3 specifically highlights the importance of formalizing 
MSMEs, supporting the promotion of MSME growth in productive sectors, strengthening the business 
environment, enabling DFS, and deepening financial sector reforms. The AF is also aligned with the CBS 
Strategic Plan for 2020–2024 that places emphasis on good governance and a management system.33 
Similarly, the AF is aligned with Somalia National ICT Policy and Strategy (2019–2024), 34 which prioritizes 
the introduction of an enabling environment for scaling up the use of ICT and uptake of digital services 
and leveraging ICT to support economic development and social inclusion for all Somalis. The proposed 
 
31 The AF is also aligned with the FGS’ commitment to scale up its response to COVID-19, and the proposed AF activities are fully 
in line with the relevant government strategies. The FGS’ ‘Socioeconomic Impact and Required Response for COVID-19 in Somalia’ 
note, prepared in March 2020, prioritizes increasing support to MSMEs to address liquidity constraints in the productive sectors. 
32 In FY20, the World Bank committed over US$300 million of relief-focused IDA grants. The priority in FY21 shifted to recovery 
through restructuring of programs and new activities to build back better. The WBG COVID-19 Country Program Response Note 
for Somalia is included in annex VIII.  
33 This involves channeling resources to central bank reorganization processes and policy orientation of its operations; 
independent oversight by its Board of Directors, capacity development, and performance evaluation; strengthening of 
stakeholder communication, audit, and internal control; and adoption of international best practices.  
34 See https://mptt.gov.so/en/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/National-ICT-Policy-Strategy-2019-2024.pdf. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 113 
 
AF activities are also in line with the Somali Digital ID Policy, adopted in May 2019, which sets out the goal 
of providing all residents with a unique, trusted, and verifiable identity and establishing an identity 
verification platform that can be used by multiple service providers, in a manner aligned with international 
good practices, including the Principles on Identification for Sustainable Development. 
II. DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
A. Project Description 
27. 
The proposed AF activities are in line with the components of the parent project SCALED-UP 
(P168115). The AF project description, PDO, project components and sub-components, safeguards, 
fiduciary, and implementation arrangements will remain materially unchanged, continuing to support 
progress toward increased access to basic digital financial and government services targeting 
entrepreneurship and employment, particularly for women. The AF activities will scale up the parent 
project’s activities through Gargaraa’s financing windows to mitigate MSMEs’ liquidity shortages caused 
by the pandemic and by accelerating reforms and operationalizing digital infrastructure and platforms to 
enable the integrity and proper functioning of financial markets and digital financial systems. This will in 
turn help tackle the negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on Somali MSMEs and strengthen the 
FGS’ ability to build back better. 
28. 
The AF project will also be combined with a restructuring of the parent project to reflect (a) 
updates to the RF to reflect an updated assessment and scaling up of the parent project; (b) changes in 
disbursement arrangements to introduce performance-based conditions (PBCs) for activities that support 
the CBS given the growing capacity and the need to incentivize critical financial sector reforms, and scaled 
up and extended offering by Gargaara; (c) changes in disbursement projections; (d) changes to costs 
pursuant to the AF; (e) updated covenants; and (f) an extension of the project closing date by 30 months 
to December 31, 2025.  
29. 
The RF and the Theory of Change (ToC) of the parent project were reviewed during the AF 
preparation. Accordingly, changes to the ToC were identified, and PDO and intermediate-level indicators 
were adjusted to (a) reflect the scale-up of project activities (for example, introduction of PBCs and scale-
up of Gargaara offering and digital ID activities); (b) streamline and strengthen the alignment of indicators 
with the provision of relief support for COVID-19 recovery; and (c) add/modify end target values given the 
extension of the project closing date to December 31, 2025. The revised ToC is presented in annex IV, and 
specific changes to PDO and intermediate indicators are presented in annex V. 
30. 
The project will retain the same component structure under the AF. Component 1 will continue 
to focus on strengthening institutions, and Component 2 will continue to support sustainable and digitally 
enabled mechanisms to increase individuals’ and businesses’ access to services. Component 3 will cover 
project management and coordination. The details of each component are outlined in the following 
paragraphs. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 113 
 
Component 1. Strengthening Institutions (US$13 million equivalent) 
Sub-component 1.1. Support to CBS (US$10 million equivalent) 
31. 
In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, the AF will scale up support to the CBS and provide 
strengthened incentives for the achievement of critical financial sector reforms that safeguard financial 
stability and integrity and thus secure stable transmittal channels for international remittances, private 
capital, and ODA. In the face of disruptions to transmittal channels associated with the pandemic 
witnessed in March 2020, the AF elevates to a higher level the priority the parent project places on helping 
other IDA and MPF operations and FIs in Somalia secure stable transmittal channels for ODA, international 
remittances, and other private sector flows. This will be achieved by accelerating the CBS reforms to the 
next level related to (a) central bank governance and financial reporting to enable CBS capitalization; (b) 
activation of critical institutional systems to enable functional corresponding banking arrangements; and 
(c) improved CBS supervisory oversight, capacity building, and staff reorganization into a more effective 
structure to tackle financial integrity and de-risking. In so doing, this sub-component introduces PBCs 
focused on building solid service delivery by both the CBS and FIs meeting internationally accepted 
standards coupled with expanded financial access for individuals and businesses with strong integrity 
controls (see annex II for the proposed description of the PBCs).  
32. 
Given the strong ownership, leadership, and support from CBS management and the new Board 
of Directors, the use of PBCs’ financing approach provides an opportunity to focus efforts on results and 
quality. Previous support through SCORE (P152241) financing focused on inputs has been used effectively 
for CBS policy objectives, strengthening of governance, and enhancement of operational efficiency and 
systems. The introduction of the PBCs provides an opportunity for the World Bank to deepen technical 
policy dialogue and technical support transforming ambitions to realities and results. Going beyond input-
based investments and toward outcomes, the PBCs will be critical in accelerating desired CBS reforms. 
The use of PBCs only under sub-component 1.1 and no other areas of the AF is because this leverages the 
improved implementation capacity of reforms by the CBS, as witnessed in recent years under the parent 
project and predecessor project (SCORE) (P152241), contributing to Somalia reaching the Decision Point 
under the HIPC Initiative in March 2020. 
33. 
The AF support will consist of US$6 million in PBCs’ financing and US$4 million through 
traditional IPF financing. The allocation is based on the CBS rationalization program submitted to the 
World Bank, which amounts to US$12.05 million and adjusted to US$11.04 million eligible expenditure 
program by excluding US$1.01 million voluntary severance scheme package. 35 The bulk of the financing 
allocations under this sub-component is structured to be disbursed conditionally upon achievement of 
PBCs as provided under table 1 (on PBC and sub-component expenditure composition), while the 
remainder of the resources are proposed to be channeled through traditional IPF financing. The US$11.04 
million CBS reorganization and staffing program outlined under annex III will comprise the eligible 
expenditures. These expenditures are self-contained and discrete investments focused on laying the 
 
35 The entire budget for the CBS program of US$12.05 million has been adjusted by US$1.01 million for expenditures related to a 
voluntary severance scheme package. This will be considered when the necessary safeguard assessments are completed. This 
will call for a restructuring of the project further down the line once the feasibility of support under the AF project for the 
voluntary severance scheme package is established.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 113 
 
foundations for strong policy reorientation of central banking as opposed to ongoing expenditures 
focused on existing fiscal agency organizational structures.  
34. 
The AF will also support the hiring of DFS advisers, strengthening of CBS governance and 
financial reporting, activation of critical enterprise resource planning (ERP) modules at the central bank, 
and improved CBS supervisory oversight. By strengthening these functions, the CBS would be able to 
offer improved services and business continuity in the face of COVID-19 and other crises faced by the 
country and would meet international standards. The PBCs are aligned with the PDO and the CBS 
rationalization program designed with support from other development partners and are expected to 
help with transforming and strengthening the CBS’ orientation toward areas of maximum reform impact 
and influence strategic prioritization and resource allocation36. The CBS remains central to state building 
and stabilization of the financial and private sector, contributing to tackling the country’s drivers of 
fragility and fostering state legitimacy. The project will help CBS develop a capital injection plan (CIP) to 
support attainment of the policy goals of reorganization, sustainability of reorganization interventions, 
and the possibility of continued investment in strengthening of CBS’ capacity across core central banking 
functions. 37 
35. 
The proposed PBCs would ensure that the AF is linked to results on policy, key reforms, and 
improved CBS institutional performance contributing to proper functioning of financial markets, 
considering the pandemic, and accelerating financial inclusion while improving the integrity of markets. 
The specific program expenditures associated with the activities to be implemented to achieve the PBCs 
include (a) the CBS core restructuring priorities; (b) human capital development linked to the new policies, 
procedures, and manuals; (c) infrastructure; and (d) development and operationalization of policies, 
procedures, manuals, and records management as outlined under annex III. These expenditures outlined 
in the CBS rationalization program are transitional and incremental and will help the CBS accelerate the 
transition to a policy-oriented central bank, thereby contributing to greater financial stability and integrity 
in a fragile context. The focus is on outcomes ensuring that high standards of corporate governance, risk 
management, and compliance safeguarding against illicit financial flows are met by the FIs and CBS. The 
use of PBCs also serves as the road map to sustainable reforms and sequenced logical building blocks for 
ease of implementation monitoring and incentive management.  
 
 
 
36 The strengthening of CBS governance and financial reporting is aimed at enabling central bank capitalization. The priority of 
activation of the CBS institutional system and ERP modules is linked to enabling functional correspondent banking relations. This 
will include the Wolfsberg Group Anti-Money Laundering Principles for Correspondent Banking and financial action task force 
(FATF) standards, particularly FATF Guidance on Correspondent Banking Services. The AF activities under this subcomponent 
would also complement the new financial sector initiative, which is in its early stage of design and preparation and is supported 
by the MPF donors including the United Kingdom, United States, and European Union. 
37 Required rightsizing of personnel and non-personnel expenses essential for a rapid shift toward policy orientation and push for 
sustainable results, particularly those affecting financial integrity and the de-risking agenda covering ML/TF risks. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 113 
 
Table 1. Summary of Sub-component 1.1. Financing 
 
Available Amount 
(US$, thousands equivalent) 
CBS Reform Benchmarks (PBCs) 
FY21 
FY22 
FY23 
Total 
PBC1: Strengthened governance and financial reporting of the 
CBS to enable capitalization 
375 
875 
2,250 
3,500 
PBC2: Activation of critical institutional systems within CBS to 
enable corresponding banking arrangements 
500 
1,000 
 
1,500 
PBC3: Improved CBS supervisory oversight, capacity building and 
staff reorganization into a more effective structure to tackle 
financial integrity and de-risking 
400 
600 
 
1,000 
Total PBC-based financing 
1,275 
2,475 
2,250 
6,000 
Traditional IPF input-based financing 
3,000 
1,000 
 
4,000 
Total Sub-component 1.1 financing under the AF 
 
 
 
10,000 
36. 
The AF proposes PBCs designed to be scalable to allow proportionate disbursement in case of 
partial achievement of performance benchmarks, based on agreed-upon levels and intermediate 
targets. This allows for lower disbursement amounts when results are only partially achieved. In addition, 
the disbursements are linked to manageable bundles of result areas to be achieved by the CBS in a 
stepwise and graduated approach over the first 24 months of the AF so that delivery of these outcomes 
is not delayed given the COVID-19 emergency. Further, the breakdown of the PBCs into manageable 
bundles of reforms considers the long development timelines needed to implement activities given the 
fragile context and urgency for accelerated results and outcomes in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Sub-component 1.2. Support to FRC (US$0.5 million equivalent) 
37. 
The AF will finance additional activities related to the improvement and implementation of the 
AML/CFT regime and dissemination of results of the ongoing national risk assessment, requested by the 
FRC. Strengthening financial integrity will continue to support a steady flow of remittances through the 
COVID-19 crisis and beyond. Furthermore, fighting illicit flows through strengthened financial integrity 
will support a more inclusive recovery. The AF support will include support for the FRC’s planned outreach 
initiative to the FMS and subnational MDAs for disseminating ML/FT risks and AML/CFT priority policies 
and implementation actions. This can be achieved through a series of seminars and retreats, including 
study visits to neighboring countries to discuss the relevance of the agenda. Additionally, the FRC has 
identified the need to support all sectors in terms of AML/CFT policy development, implementation, and 
awareness raising—notably more progress is needed regarding FIs and designated nonfinancial 
businesses and professions (DNFBP). Consulting services will be financed for the FRC to review and draft 
relevant regulations, develop policies and procedures, and increase AML/CFT awareness through 
additional stakeholder engagement. Consulting services will also be hired by the FRC to conduct a mock 
mutual evaluation of Somalia’s effectiveness in preventing and combating ML/FT, following the FATF’s 
methodology of 2012, and in preparation for the upcoming Middle East and North Africa-FATF mutual 
evaluation of 2024. Increased support for dissemination and capacity building on AML/CFT measures to 
be implemented and transaction analysis in relation to both FIs and DNFBP will also be provided. Increased 
inter-agency cooperation between the FRC and other agencies, through capacity building, is needed to 
close the loop, particularly when it comes to appropriate dissemination of intelligence from the FRC to 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 113 
 
relevant authorities. Finally, AF activities may include the FRC study tours to financial intelligence units in 
the region and sponsoring secondments for its staff to increase their capacity for financial intelligence 
analysis. Specific financial allocations will be based on results from the ongoing National Risk Assessment. 
Sub-component 1.3. Support to MoCT and NCA (US$2.5 million equivalent) 
38. 
The AF proposes to strengthen the enabling framework for digital service delivery, data 
management, and data safeguards, critical to supporting remote working and business continuity in the 
public sector in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic and future emergencies through continued 
technical and operational support. Support will be provided to the MoCT to introduce a harmonized 
government approach to data protection and cybersecurity, grounded in inclusive government 
consultation. TA will be provided to develop shared strategic, governance, legal, 38 and institutional 
frameworks and action plans aimed at safely expanding e-services (supported under sub-component 
2.3). 39 Examples of shared frameworks to be supported include development of a National Cybersecurity 
Strategy; National Guidelines for the Protection of Critical National Information Infrastructure; a National 
Institutional and Governance Structure for Cybersecurity; an enterprise architecture for the FGS; a shared 
government business and disaster continuity plan, including for critical infrastructure; and shared 
cybersecurity compliance standards. The MoCT’s technical and institutional capacity will be bolstered, 
allowing it to provide stronger technical cross-support to MDAs assisted under the parent project—CBS, 
FRC, MoCI, NCA, Gargaara, and the digital ID Authority—with respect to their digital initiatives. Support 
will be provided allowing for the adoption of common frameworks and road maps for e-service scale-up, 
which can support an incremental movement toward a ‘whole-of-government’ approach grounded in 
shared framework, platforms, and infrastructure, which is expected to generate operational efficiencies 
and savings and increase readiness for introducing key digital services such as digital ID. The AF will also 
accelerate the NCA’s work on major regulatory milestones (such as the adoption and implementation of 
a new spectrum management framework through additional TA and equipment), strengthen its basic 
regulatory functions (for example, systems for data collection), and support additional training and 
business continuity of the agency, which is yet to secure larger financing from the FGS given the 
Government’s constrained fiscal space in connection with COVID-19.  
Sub-component 1.4. Support to Digital ID Authority 
39. 
No AF is allocated under this sub-component. US$2 million in TA support is already allocated 
under the parent project, which will cover support for the ID Authority’s institutional setup and related 
capacity building, including legal advisory support to put in place ID-enabling legislation and technical 
advisory support for the development of design, strategy, and procurement documents and the early 
operationalization of the ID system. This support is maintained. The FGS has legally established an ID 
Authority. At the same time, it will be important to accelerate progress toward the adoption of 
complementary enabling legislation, including on data protection, and other areas in line with the 
 
38 The MoCT has confirmed that it stands ready to support drafting of legislation enabling the digital economy, that is, data 
protection, cybersecurity, and e-transactions. A consultant will be embedded at the MoCT as a legal adviser to anchor related TA. 
39 Somalia currently lacks any related capabilities, including business continuity and recovery plans. The NCA plays a key role with 
respect to managing cybersecurity threats pertaining to network infrastructure—critical for continuity in communications and 
mobile money services during the crisis.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 113 
 
commitments set out in the Digital ID Policy. 40 The parent project plans to front-load and refocus certain 
activities initially planned under this sub-component (for example, with respect to enabling frameworks 
for data protection, cybersecurity, e-transactions, and so on), taking a broader ecosystems approach to 
the enabling environment support envisioned and increasing related support under the AF, as related TA 
will help reinforce and increase readiness of all digital initiatives supported and not just the digital ID 
system.  
Component 2. Enabling Financial and Digital Services (US$55 million equivalent) 
Sub-component 2.1. Financial Intermediary Financing for MSMEs (through Gargaara) (US$25 million 
equivalent) 
40. 
Sub-component 2.1 aims to provide relief and accelerate the recovery of MSMEs from the 
impact of Somalia’s multiple crises through the scale-up of Gargaara’s existing financing windows. The 
AF would scale up the micro and small loans window for MSMEs by US$9 million and the large loans 
window by US$4 million. The PFIs onlending those funds will target vulnerable but viable firms in targeted 
productive sectors, with special focus on women-owned and women-managed firms. This scale-up of both 
windows under the AF will be done without triggering additional safeguards or adjusting FM 
implementation arrangements.  
41. 
Under the AF, Gargaara will also provide funds for TA and training needs of participating 
commercial banks and microfinance institutions to be able to efficiently select, assess, and lend to 
targeted firms. In some cases, the TA may be provided in the form of a matching grant to implement 
tailored institutional development plans (IDPs)41 to build the capacity of the PFIs. The IDP matching grant 
requirement will incentivize the crowding-in of private capital to co-finance the IDPs (for systems 
improvements including FM, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), safeguards, AML/CFT, and developing 
new products) and outreach to MSMEs, particularly micro and small businesses owned and managed by 
women. 
42. 
Targeted vulnerable but viable micro and small enterprises will also be eligible for matching 
grants for BDS to help mitigate COVID-19 impacts and strengthen their loan applications.42 Support to 
firms will be structured on a partial cost-recovery basis to ensure that they are demand driven and avoid 
creating distortions. Supported BDS beneficiaries would be restricted to MSMEs selected by PFIs and 
activities will be limited to those with strong economic rationale and long-term sustainability. These firms 
will be selected based on performance before the COVID-19 pandemic, their relative vulnerability to 
current business circumstances, and their potential for rapid recovery. Digital innovation skills and 
technology upgrading for improved resilience and women’s economic empowerment will be an 
underlying and cross-cutting element across the set of support services provided using short-term 
 
40 The World Bank provided comments on the proposed law in December 2020, which highlighted gaps and areas that may benefit 
from further clarification to ensure complete alignment with the commitments made by the FGS as part of its Digital ID Policy 
endorsed by the Cabinet in May 2019. 
41 IDPs are described in the World Bank Financial Intermediation Guidance Note and help improve internal systems, products, 
credit allocation systems, and other institutional needs. 
42 PFIs have retrenched investments in the commercial financing to micro and small enterprises because of perceptions of greater 
vulnerability and risks during the pandemic. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 113 
 
matching grants. The BDS activities will focus on strengthening MSME business investment plans, adapting 
their business models and processes with the aim of accelerating their COVID-19 recovery and adaptation, 
developing new products, increasing their productivity and resilience, and improving their likelihood of 
accessing PFI financing. The BDS will be provided through a specialized professional entity to be managed 
by Gargaara. 
43. 
In addition, the AF will support Gargaara to crowd-in larger amounts of commercial financing 
to MSMEs that have been underserved because of perceptions of greater vulnerability and risks during 
the pandemic. A study43 is under way to assess the feasibility of a risk-sharing mechanism to incentivize 
PFI outreach to this market segment. 44 If this risk-sharing mechanism is found to be feasible, US$2.5 
million would be allocated for this activity. 45 This would result in an estimated direct private capital 
mobilization (PCM) of US$5.0 million.  
44. 
The balance of the AF under this sub-component will fund additional operational and 
administrative costs for Gargaara. Specifically, US$4.5 million will be allocated for operational support 
for Gargaara, for  IT system upgrade, staffing, and capacity-building activities needed by Gargaara to safely 
expand its portfolio. Given the COVID-19 challenges, Gargaara working alongside a monitoring agent will  
adopt new digital tools requirements to track the portfolio and identify problem loans. 46 This also includes 
US$1.5 million to co-finance investments in IDPs for PFIs.   
Sub-component 2.2. Digital ID Services (US$15 million equivalent) 
45. 
This sub-component will fund the ID system’s technical infrastructure, including components 
related to enrollment, secure identity management, credential issuance, and digital authentication .47 
 
43 The study would include recommendations on fees, leveraging, portfolio definition, documentation requirements, service 
standards, and other operational elements of an effective risk-sharing mechanism or facility. Gargaara has commenced 
preparatory work to conduct the feasibility study together with a team of researchers from Georgetown University and the 
Brookings Institution, Washington, DC; Brookings Institution, Doha; and Stockholm School of Economics, Stockholm. The study is 
expected to be completed by September 2021. 
44 Risk sharing is often employed in high-risk environments where commercial FIs that are committed to expanding their client 
base hold large amounts of savings and exceeding capital requirements. 
45 A condition of disbursement would be established to ensure that with the exception of feasibility study expenditures and 
related consultations with commercial FIs, no funds would be used by Gargaara for the implementation of the risk-sharing 
mechanism until the study has been completed and the World Bank has provided a technical review and ‘no objection’. The risk-
sharing mechanism would be consistent with the scaling up approach of the AF; therefore, no new safeguards will be triggered. 
It would be adjusted after the effects of the pandemic have been overcome and markets return to normal practices. Any final 
design would meet the 16 principles established for partial credit risk mechanisms promoted by the World Bank (see 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/financialsector/publication/principles-for-public-credit-guarantee-schemes-cgss-for-
smes). 
46 AF allocation of US$25 million for this subcomponent is as follows: (a) US$13 million for the two lending windows; (b) US$2.5 
million for the risk-sharing mechanism; (c) US$5.0 million for matching grants to eligible MSMEs for BDS providers, with ; and (d) 
US$4.5 million in operational support for Gargaara, including US$1.5 million for TA and training for PFIs to implement IDPs.  
47 The design and implementation of the digital ID infrastructure will be aligned with principles, objectives, and features outlined 
in the Somali Digital ID Policy and aligned with the Principles on Identification for Sustainable Development 
(https://id4d.worldbank.org/principles). These include that registration and ID credentials are universally accessible to all 
residents, free from discrimination and free of charge; that data collection will be limited to only those necessary for establishing 
uniqueness and enabling identity verification and access to basic services; and that registrants will have access to an appropriate 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 113 
 
Accordingly, the AF will enable the issuance of universally accessible, unique, and digitally verifiable IDs, 
underpinned by a foundational ID system. For the project period, the financed components are expected 
to include the delivery, operationalization, and maintenance of all hardware and software required to (a) 
facilitate registration, (b) facilitate biometric de-duplication, (c) provide secure data storage and 
management, (d) issue credentials, (e) enable timely grievance recording and redress, and (f) provide 
reliable identity verification and authentication mechanisms for financial service providers and social 
assistance programs. The design, procurement, deployment, and maintenance of these components will 
be supported through technical advisory services—for which financing is provided under the parent 
project—to optimize system costs, security, and utility and build capacity for long-term system operation 
and maintenance among Somali staff. In parallel, certain components of the broader enabling digital 
infrastructure, including shared hosting services and disaster recovery and operationalization of basic 
cybersecurity and data protection provisions, will be front-loaded and rescoped under sub-components 
1.3 and 2.3 as they serve as a broader enabling function for all digital initiatives supported under the 
project. 
46. 
Given the complexity from a technical, logistical, and political economy perspective of 
operationalizing a digital ID system, adequate planning, technical expertise, and early stakeholder 
engagement are critical for success. Support for such preparatory activities is provided under the parent 
project countrywide across federal and regional leadership. In the Somali context, buy-in from FMS will 
be particularly important to secure access to and acceptance of the new IDs countrywide and enable the 
project to achieve its registration targets. Developing an implementation strategy that outlines the roles 
of key stakeholders and lays out a countrywide enrollment plan built on broad-based consensus across 
federal and regional leadership will thus be vital for ensuring that the system acquired will be ‘fit for 
purpose’ and that the ID system can be deployed and integrated into service delivery rapidly. 48 Such a 
widely supported implementation strategy can then inform the definition of the functional and technical 
architecture of the system and related procurements. Vendor lock-in and costly, unsuitable technology 
choices represent significant risks in the implementation of the ID project. It is thus also critical that key 
planning and procurement documents, such as technical and functional requirements, are prepared with 
great care and with the engagement of international technical expertise. To this end, authorities are 
encouraged to fully leverage the resources committed under the parent project for these purposes. 
47. 
Disbursement of the AF for this sub-component will be conditional on the adoption of critical 
components of the legal enabling framework as well as broad-based agreement on the ID system’s 
implementation arrangements, as aligned with the Digital ID Policy. These legal building blocks and 
preparatory activities serve as critical safeguards and enablers to ensure successful initial take-up and 
long-term sustainability of the system. Conditions of disbursement thus stipulate that no withdrawal of 
AF funds shall be made for digital ID activities until (a) the FGS enacts legislation on the establishment and 
implementation of the digital ID system49 and general data protection, in alignment with the Digital 
 
grievance redress and resolution mechanisms. In addition, it will be important that the technical architecture and components of 
the ID system follow an outcome- and standards-based approach and minimize the risk of vendor lock-in and enable future 
updates and changes in configuration to be implemented cost- and time-efficiently. 
48 The implementation strategy and the design and deployment of the ID system more broadly will also need to be aligned with 
the Somali Digital ID Policy.  
49 Such legislation is expected to, among others, define the basic purposes of the ID system; establish and specify the mandate, 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 113 
 
Identification Policy and in form and substance satisfactory to IDA, and (b) an ID system implementation 
strategy, including a countrywide enrollment plan, which has been reviewed by the FMS, is prepared and 
submitted, in a form and substance that is satisfactory, to IDA.50 These conditions will help mitigate the 
risks of unsuitable or unsustainable technology and design choices, including vendor and technology lock-
in; promote the rapid, countrywide take-up of the new ID system by building trust and consensus across 
FMS; and minimize the risk of fragmentation and duplication in investments.  
48. 
The US$3 million planned to support enrollment for the digital ID system under the parent 
project will be augmented to facilitate enrollment beyond the 1 million individuals targeted under the 
parent project, to up to 3 million by the end of the project. Specifically, the AF will support operation 
costs related to enrollment, training, and transportation and costs related to the distribution of ID 
credentials. Special measures and registration efforts will also be put in place to ensure access to the ID 
system for remote, marginalized, and vulnerable populations including women, children, persons with 
disabilities, and internally displaced persons. Concrete recommendations to inform enrollment processes 
and practices will be developed with support from a social research and advisory firm, financed through 
the parent project and already onboarded, which will undertake consultations and qualitative research to 
better map people’s perspectives and constraints with regard to accessing and using IDs. The project will 
also support the implementation of an information, education, and communications campaign, including 
targeted messaging for members of vulnerable populations to build trust and describe the benefits and 
processes for ID enrollment. Reaching populations in areas that may be difficult for government entities 
to operate in will be facilitated through an ‘ecosystem’ approach to enrollment, leveraging banks, mobile 
network operators, NGOs, and other service providers as enrollment agents for the ID system. The 
enrollment processes could also be linked to the opportunity for individuals to concurrently open 
transaction accounts with banks and/or mobile money, which could help expand financial access 
substantially while also meeting ML/TF risk management requirements. 
49. 
The primary use cases for the digital ID system include the financial sector and social protection. 
The new ID system and ID credentials issued will initially focus support on boosting financial sector 
integrity and enable more people to access financial services by facilitating improved identity verification 
and compliance with customer due diligence (CDD) requirements. The foundational digital ID system and 
the customer verification system (CVS) will be fully interoperable—that is, able to exchange data in an 
automated manner and the CVS will draw on the ID system for identity verification and authentication for 
the implementation of electronic KYC (eKYC) protocols to provide greater assurance about customers’ 
true identities. In addition, the unified social registry also intends to leverage the unique ID numbers 
issued by the digital ID system to ensure that each record in the registry is associated with a real, unique 
individual. 
 
governance arrangements, and functions of the ID Authority; and lay out key system features and principles, such as those related 
to registration processes, credential issuance, system interoperability, and the use of identity verification and authentication 
mechanisms for financial service providers and beyond.  
50 There are several risks, already identified at entry of the SCALED-UP parent project, including the risks of vendor lock-in, with 
suboptimal technical or other unsuitable features coded into the system; low coverage/exclusion risks; and financial sustainability 
and security risks, which could materialize if the ID system is not underpinned by a robust enabling environment and if sufficient 
technical expertise is not engaged throughout the design, planning, and implementation process. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 113 
 
Sub-component 2.3. Government and Retail Payment Services (US$13 million equivalent) 
 
50. 
The AF will scale up investment in the foundational infrastructure and services that can 
warehouse and safeguard critical information systems, which can be shared across the Government to 
ensure more secure data management and exchange. This will help create an enabling environment for 
key digital systems in the pipeline, including the digital ID system. Investments made will support a 
common and scalable approach to data management and hosting, which is expected to yield significant 
operational and efficiency gains and gradually increase readiness for the scale-up of more transactional 
digital services that require increased data exchange. Thus, it will help accelerate the rollout of digital 
financial and government services, including the digital ID and social assistance programs, which have 
been identified as priorities in the context of the Government’s COVID-19 response. This sub-component 
will explore the feasibility, including optimal business and hosting models, and finance the introduction 
of a shared government data hosting solution, which is likely to rely on a hybrid approach that includes 
the introduction of a joint government data center and shared government cloud as well as related 
recover and/or backup site. The AF would cover related studies, service contracts, and installation of 
related hardware, including possible refurbishment of the optimal physical hosting site selected. 
51. 
As noted earlier, the AF will also increase financing for the operationalization of foundational 
cybersecurity and data protection frameworks. The Government will be supported to introduce a 
national Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) – Security Operations Center (SOC) with an ISO 
27000 series or equivalent certification based on a build-operate-transfer model (likely to be hosted by 
the NCA) that could serve as an initial basis for gradually bolstering Somalia’s cybersecurity threat 
intelligence, monitoring, and prevention capabilities over time, including initial equipment, office 
refurbishment, related hardware and software, training, and consultancy costs. Financing is also set to 
cover regular penetration tests by certified ethical hackers and by the CERT to identify vulnerabilities as 
well as technical solutions for the safe transfer and interoperability of sensitive and personal data. The 
FGS is currently being supported in conducting a cybersecurity maturity model assessment that should 
provide guidance on areas where additional capacity building is need, including support for training and 
awareness raising to reduce cybersecurity incidents in the civil service and specialized training for law 
enforcement and judiciary. The AF is likely to cover basic cybersecurity awareness training for key MDAs 
supported, particularly as it pertains to remote working and cybersecurity needs related to key system 
deployed, including ID.  
52. 
Support is also envisioned to operationalize the future data protection law, involving the setup 
of an independent Data Protection Office (DPO) and launch of a registry of data processors and 
controllers and complaints reporting system. Given the FGS budget constraints, this office could initially 
be introduced at the MoCT, with the view of later becoming an independent entity. The AF would cover 
related office and IT equipment, specialized training (for DPO, government officials, judiciary, and law 
enforcement), embedded advisers to support initial DPO setup and staffing, and hardware and software 
for the registration and reporting IT systems deployed (registry of data controllers and processors, 
compliance and complaints management system, and database of personal information). Support for 
operational, financial, and human resource (HR) planning for the office would also be covered. The AF 
would also finance outreach and awareness campaigns needed to sensitize key data users to requirements 
under the law. Financing will cover a data privacy risk assessment and compilation of a personal data 
catalogue, support for drafting a first round of regulations on priority topic areas, TA for formulating and 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 113 
 
implementing shared compliance monitoring, auditing, and enforcement frameworks, as well as 
conducting site visits, including developing a complaint investigation framework. 
53. 
The AF will provide limited support related to ensuring that core MDAs have adequate internet 
connections and basic IT tools to meet immediate needs identified in the context of the COVID-19 
pandemic and finance quick wins that boost front-facing service delivery. Integration of the Financial 
Management Information System with the core banking system, STARS and SPS, has, for example, been 
identified as a quick win to increase the readiness for scaling up the Government’s use of digital payments, 
which has been identified as a priority in the context of COVID-19 response and recovery where remote 
services delivery has proved critical to social distancing strategies that need to be employed. The AF will 
finance requisite integration of systems (hardware and software), business process reengineering, and 
training related to the digitization of selected government revenue and expenditure streams and 
associated workflows that are critical for uninterrupted public service delivery in the face of the COVID-
19 pandemic and other crises. The AF will also finance urgent basic IT equipment needs identified and 
capacity purchase for MDAs supported, allowing them to support the new functions assigned to them, 
based on a rapid IT and capacity audit. Finally, the AF will support expenditures related to the CBS setting 
up a new CVS to enable use of eKYC protocols in the financial services sector. The CVS will be 
complementary to the foundational digital ID system. Once the foundational ID system is fully 
operationalized, the two systems will be linked, and the CVS will leverage the digital ID system’s 
authentication and verification services to strengthen CDD. This will be critical to expanding financial 
inclusion for individuals by enabling the scale-up of transaction account ownership, particularly for 
women and women entrepreneurs. 
Sub-component 2.4. E-registration Services for SMEs (US$2 million equivalent) 
54. 
The AF will support the MoCI to sustain registration momentum related to the recent launch of 
the full functionality of the online BRS. The MoCI is making steady progress with online registration, with 
620 applications received and 150 companies successfully registered as of March 23, 2021. The rollout of 
the digital BRS is particularly pertinent in the COVID-19 context, in line with the Government’s efforts to 
limit physical interactions and scale up online service provision. The digital business registration services 
would also enable CDD as a pillar of an effective AML/CFT program by financial service providers operating 
in Somalia, including for Gargaara PFIs. The AF will be used to (a) expand BRS services beyond Mogadishu 
to other FMS in subsequent phases tentatively planned for rollout in Puntland and Jubaland, subject to 
final confirmation based on the FMS Readiness Assessment Report and client demand; (b) build the 
capacity of both internal users at FMS ministries and final users in business communities; and (c) 
strengthen stakeholder engagement by increasing outreach, media campaigns, and feedback loops of 
MSMEs using the online BRS. In addition, the AF will support establishment of a virtual one-stop help desk 
for enterprises using the BRS51. 
Component 3: Project Management and Coordination (US$2 million equivalent) 
55. 
It is proposed that the project’s management and coordination arrangements will be enhanced 
to ensure appropriate implementation of the AF. The AF will support the scale-up of gender-sensitive 
 
51 This subcomponent has been designed and will be implemented in close coordination with the IFC team. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 113 
 
programming; promoting of compliance with good safeguards practices; improved stakeholder 
engagement (especially targeting women); and strengthening of GRM and citizen engagement 
mechanisms to enhance feedback loops to shore up early learning, adaptive, and iterative approaches to 
implementation. Strengthened project management mechanisms will be particularly needed in the 
constrained COVID-19 environment. As Gargaara operations scale up, the PIU, Gargaara management, 
and PFIs will need to employ additional resources and mechanisms to strengthen the monitoring, 
evaluation, and learning systems in place, especially in view of the COVID-19 restrictions. Furthermore, 
M&E systems will need to be further scaled up when the digital ID enrollments begin and business 
registration services commence across different FMS. Strengthening these M&E functions will be 
supported by the AF. While the AF was prepared under  a waiver to process the AF activities under the 
safeguards policies rather than the ESF, additional resources 52 will also be needed to ensure full 
compliance with the additional safeguards requirements 53 outlined in the updated Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP). Finally, the AF will also 
finance expenditures associated with verification of the PBCs to be introduced under sub-component 1.1. 
B. AF Budget 
56. 
The total amount of the AF requested is US$70 million (US$50 million IDA and US$20 million 
MPF), with additional US$5 million PCM expected under sub-component 2.1. A breakdown of the AF by 
component and sub-components is provided in table 2. 
 
 
 
52 A dedicated social specialist and a part-time GBV adviser will be recruited to support the environmental specialist at the PIU. 
53 The project triggers OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment). However, in compliance with waiver conditions, it will identify, assess 
and mitigate an expanded range of environmental and social risks and impacts consistent with the ESF, including environmental 
pollution arising from the financing of the livestock sector, child labor, exclusion of minorities and other disadvantaged 
populations, gender-based violence (GBV), and loss and breaches in data privacy and protection measures. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 113 
 
Table 2. Changes to Allocations by Component (US$, millions) 
SCALED-UP Components 
SCALED-UP 
Allocation 
AF 
Total Financing  
Component 1: Strengthening Institutions 
7.0  
13.0 
20.0 
Sub-component 1.1: Support to CBS 
1.5 
10.0a 
11.5a  
Sub-component 1.2: Support to FRC 
1.5 
0.5 
2.0b 
Sub-component 1.3: Support to MoCT and NCA 
2.0 
2.5 
4.5b  
Sub-component 1.4: Support to ID Authority 
2.0 
— 
2.0 
Component 2: Enabling Financial and Digital Services 
20.0 
55.0 
75.0 
Subcomponent 2.1: Financial Intermediary Financing 
to MSMEs 
15.0 
25.0c 
40.0c  
Sub-component 2.2: Digital ID Services 
3.0 
15.0d 
18.0b 
Sub-component 2.3: Government and Retail Payment 
Services 
1.0 
13.0b 
14.0b 
Sub-component 2.4: E-registration Services for SMEs 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
Component 3: Project Management and Coordination 
4.0 
2.0 
6.0 
TOTAL  
31.0 
70.0 
101.0 
PCM (under sub-component 2.1) 
 
5.0e 
5.0 e 
Note: 
a. The AF proposes to introduce PBCs as reform incentives for the CBS to attain a number of strategic goals in relation 
to the enabling environment supported under sub-component 1.1 and critical to securing stable transmittal channels 
for remittances, private capital, and ODA, focused on the de-risking agenda that can help unlock international 
investment and support correspondent banking relationships in Somalia by improving the integrity of financial 
markets and ensuring that high standards of corporate governance, risk management, and compliance safeguarding 
are in place to prevent illicit financial flows. The said scale-up will complement the financial sector initiative. 
b. The AF proposes to front-load and refocus interventions for some activities under sub-components 1.2, 1.3, 2.2, 
2.3, and 2.4 and component 3, aimed at creating an enabling environment for critical digital programs being 
supported, by introducing a common approach to data safeguards related to cybersecurity, data protection, hosting 
services, and disaster recovery, all of which serve as critical foundational investments for the FGS with respect to 
key digital services initiatives being spearheaded including the new foundation digital ID system and are expected 
to generate significant efficiency gains and support risk mitigation. 
c. Of the US$25 million AF allocation to Gargaara under sub-component 2.1, US$2.5 million will be linked to a 
condition of disbursement for the risk-sharing mechanism activity, pending (a) the results of research by Gargaara 
management that will assess feasible delivery options for risk participation, subordination, and other co-financing 
approaches to induce greater PCM and impact by leveraging Gargaara capital and (b) the World Bank’s technical 
review and ‘no objection’.  
d. Conditions of disbursement will be established in the AF to ensure that no funds will be used on digital ID until (a) 
the FGS has enacted legislation on the establishment and implementation of the digital ID system and general data 
protection, in alignment with the Digital ID Policy and (b) an ID system implementation strategy, including an FMS-
wide enrollment plan, has been prepared and reviewed by FMS.  
e. The PCM of US$5 million is expected under the risk-sharing mechanism to be introduced under sub-component 
2.1. See annex VII for details. 
 
C. Implementation Arrangements 
57. 
Implementation arrangements will remain the same as in the parent project. The MoF is the 
executing agency of the parent project. The PSC, headed by the MoF and with representatives from the 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 113 
 
MDAs, 54 will provide policy guidance and monitor progress of the project. The existing PIU will implement 
the AF activities and coordinate across the FGS and FMS. The Project Operations Manual (POM) which 
was prepared under the parent project (with the MSME Subproject Manual featured as an annex to the 
POM) will be updated to reflect AF activities before the AF project effectiveness, including PBC verification 
protocols and independent monitoring and detailed reporting formats, in form and substance satisfactory 
to the World Bank.  
58. 
The parent project’s implementation arrangements for the lines of credit under Gargaara will 
also remain the same, and the MSME Subproject Manual will outline implementation arrangements for 
the risk-sharing mechanism and MSME matching grants. The Board of Directors and management team 
selected for Gargaara under the parent project will continue to select PFIs, without undue outside 
interference. Gargaara management will continue to submit ‘MSME Financing Facility Quarterly Progress 
Reports’ to all relevant stakeholders (for example, Gargaara’s Board of Directors and the WBG). Biannual 
reviews will continue to form the basis of at least two implementation support reviews of Gargaara per 
year. Finally, an independent monitoring agent hired under the parent project will continue to (a) provide 
an added layer of monitoring as set out in Gargaara’s Subproject Manual, (b) complement the safeguards 
responsibility of Gargaara, and (c) act as an ‘early warning’ whistleblower in case governance issues are 
detected. The FGS and World Bank will also continue to carry out a joint progress review for the project 
every two years. The MSME Subprojects Manual will also be updated to outline MSME matching grants 
and risk-sharing mechanism implementation arrangements and include an augmented RF for Gargaara to 
capture indicators beyond those reflected in the project RF. 55 The BDS will be provided through a 
specialized professional entity to be managed by Gargaara, and the selection criterion will be the 
operational practices and manuals used to select and service MSMEs.  
III. KEY RISKS 
59. 
The overall risk is rated Substantial, in line with the parent project. Somalia remains a high-risk 
context for the AF project, but the mitigation and the prospects of benefits outweigh the risks, thereby 
providing a basis for engagement. The current disagreements on election modalities, the ongoing political 
tensions between the FGS and some FMS, and continued instability and fragility that the country faces 
may cause delays and difficulties in the implementation of project activities. The introduction of the digital 
ID system poses high project implementation risks, exacerbated by cybersecurity risks occasioned using 
digital technologies and low capacity of key stakeholder institutions. The project is managing this risk 
through multiple layers of monitoring and implementation support. Taking the risk management and 
mitigation measures into account, the overall residual risk for the AF project is rated Substantial. 
60. 
Political and governance (High). The risk of political instability remains high and could slow or 
derail project implementation over the course of the project. Federally, defining the AF’s activities and 
implementation plans may prove challenging given the growing impasse between the FGS and FMS over 
 
54 The MoCI, MoCT, Ministry of Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation, CBS, FRC, and NCA. The PSC will also include a 
representative from the new ID Authority once it becomes operational. 
55 The last update of the MSME Subprojects Manual was concluded in November 2020 to operationalize the large loans window. 
A comprehensive review of Gargaara operations in the last 18 months was concluded in March 2021. Results from this review 
and added AF activities will be reflected in the revised manual. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP) 
Additional Financing (P174769) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 113 
 
constitutional reform, revenue sharing, and national security, as well as the 2020/21 election. This could 
affect project activities, including digital ID enrollments which would require close collaboration between 
the FGS and FMS. Reforms supported in the HIPC debt relief initiative, the IMF’s Extended Credit Facility 
arrangement, and the World Bank financed Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project (RCRF) 
- Phase 2 (P154875), among others, provide a broader framework for risk mitigation, as reaching progress 
targets requires stakeholders from the FGS and the FMS to meet and reach agreements. Additional 
activities planned that reduce this level of risk are the AF’s own support for capacity-building activities to 
help stabilize core government functions and strengthen governance and accountability frameworks for 
supported entities. To promote engagement and consensus building across FMS on the digital ID system, 
a disbursement condition linked to a widely consulted implementation and enrollment plan will also be 
introduced. Even with this set of mitigation measures, the residual risk remains high for political and 
governance risk.  
61. 
Macroeconomic (Substantial). The Somali economy is vulnerable to shocks, including from 
adverse weather, disruptions in international trade, and remittances due to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Furthermore, despite important and widespread reforms, the FGS’ fiscal position remains weak due to 
the limited ability to generate domestic revenues, security sector expenditures dominating the budget, 
and only limited fiscal transfers between the FGS and FMS. The risk that this could result in 
macroeconomic instability that might overwhelm the reform momentum supported by the project is high. 
The Government is working to mitigate these risks through improvements in its macroeconomic 
management capacity and steady implementation of reforms supported by the HIPC process and the 
IMF’s Extended Credit Facility arrangement. Additional mitigation that helps reduce this level of risk is the 
AF’s own support for (a) formalization of businesses; (b) mitigation of liquidity shortages of MSMEs 
operating in productive sectors; (c) TA for efficient financial intermediation and improved capability of 
banks; and (d) improvement of the integrity and proper functioning of financial markets and digital 
financial systems. 
62. 
Sector strategies and policies (Moderate). The AF activities proposed are fully aligned with the 
FGS strategies in place and policy commitment made (for example