 
 
Document of 
The World Bank 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD4426 
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT PAPER 
ON A  
PROPOSED ADDITIONAL GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 34.7 MILLION 
(US$50 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
 
FOR AN 
 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING TO THE SOMALIA CRISIS RECOVERY PROJECT 
 
 
 
June 11, 2021 
 
 
Urban, Resilience And Land Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective {May 31, 2021}) 
 
Currency Unit =   Somali Shillings (SOS) 
US$1 = SOS 578.50 
US$1 = SDR 0.69 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Hafez M. H. Ghanem 
Country Director: Keith E. Hansen 
Regional Director: Mark R. Lundell 
Practice Manager: Peter D. Ellis  
Task Team Leader(s): Ayaz Parvez, Andrew James Roberts, Haris Khan 
  
 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
AF 
Additional Financing 
AFEVP 
Africa East Vice President 
CBS 
Central Bank of Somalia 
CSO 
Civil Society Organization 
CERC 
Contingent Emergency Response Component  
COPAM 
Comprehensive Operations and Accounting Procedures Manuals 
COVID-19 
Coronavirus Disease 2019 
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework  
CPRP 
Country Preparedness and Response Plan 
CRW – ERF  
Crisis Response Window- Early Response Financing  
DA 
Designated Account 
DINA 
Drought Impact and Needs Assessment 
DL 
Desert Locust 
DLC 
Desert Locust and Control 
DRM 
Disaster Risk Management  
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
EFT 
Electronic Funds Transfer 
EIA 
Environmental Impact Assessment 
ESF 
Environmental and Social Framework 
ESIA 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
ESMP 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
ESS 
Environmental and Social Standards 
E&S 
Environmental and Social 
FAM 
Famine Action Mechanism  
FAO 
Food and Agriculture Organization 
FCV  
Fragility Conflict and Violence  
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia  
FHWs 
Female Health Workers 
FINA 
Flood Impact Needs Assessment 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMIS 
Financial Management Information System 
FMS 
Federal Member States 
FSCPP 
Food Security Crisis Preparedness Plan 
FSNAU 
Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit 
GBV 
Gender-based Violence 
GRM 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product  
HH 
Households 
HIPC 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 
HRM 
Horn Risk Management 
HRP 
Humanitarian Response Plan 
IDA 
International Development Association  
 
 
 
IDP 
Internally Displaced Persons 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation  
IFI 
International Financial Institution 
IFR 
Interim Financial Report 
INGO  
International Non-Governmental Organization  
IPF  
Investment Project Financing  
IPC 
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification 
IRR 
Internal Rate of Return 
ISA 
International Standards on Auditing 
ISP 
Implementation Support Plan 
IVA 
Independent Verification Agency 
LMP 
Labor Management Plan 
MDA  
Ministries, Departments, Agencies  
MFMR  
Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources  
MIS  
Management Information System  
MLFR 
Ministry of Livestock, Forestry, and Range 
MOH 
Ministry of Health 
MOHADM 
Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management  
MOAI 
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation  
MOEWR 
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources  
MOEACC 
Ministry of Environment Agriculture and Climate Change 
MOF 
Ministry of Finance 
MOPIED 
Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Development  
MPWR 
Ministry of Public Works, Reconstruction and Housing 
MSME 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
M&E 
Monitoring & Evaluation 
NDMP 
National Disaster Management Policy 
NDP  
National Development Plan  
NEC 
National Economic Council 
NPV 
Net Present Value 
NGO 
Non-Governmental Organization 
ODA 
Official Development Assistance 
OCHA 
United Nation’s Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
OHS 
Occupational Health and Safety 
OPM 
Office of the Prime Minister 
O&M 
Operations and Maintenance 
PAD 
Project Appraisal Document 
PDO 
Project Development Objective  
PFM 
Public Financial Management  
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit  
POM 
Project Operations Manual  
PP 
Project Paper 
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development 
PSC 
Project Steering Committee  
RCRF 
Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing 
RRF 
Recovery and Resilience Framework 
 
 
 
SCRP  
Somalia Crisis Recovery Project  
SCoA 
Standard Chart of Accounts 
SDR 
Special Drawing Rights 
SEA/SH 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, and Sexual Harassment 
SEP 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
SOE 
Statements of Expenditures 
SORT 
Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool 
SPT 
State Project Team 
SRM 
Security Risk Management 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
SWALIM 
Somalia Water and Land Information Monitoring 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
TSA 
Treasury Single Account 
TTL 
Task Team Leaders 
UCS 
Use of Country Systems (UCS) 
UN 
United Nations 
UNDP 
United Nations Development Programme 
UNFPA 
United Nations Population Fund 
UNHCR 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
UNICEF 
United Nations Children’s Fund 
UNIDO 
United Nations Industrial Organization 
UNISDR 
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction 
UNOPS 
United Nations Office for Project Services 
USAID 
United States Agency for International Development  
WASH 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene  
WBG 
World Bank Group 
WFP 
World Food Programme 
WHO 
World Health Organization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... 1 
I. 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING ........................................ 8 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING .................................................................... 12 
III. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 22 
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................................. 25 
V. WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS .............................................................................. 32 
VI    SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES ..................................................................................... 33 
VII   DETAILED CHANGE(S) .................................................................................................... 33 
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 37 
ANNEX 1: HIGHLIGHTS OF THE FGS’ FOOD INSECURITY SITUATION ASSESSMENT AND 
RESPONSE STRATEGY........................................................................................................... 50 
ANNEX 2: DETAILED PROJECT DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING ............................. 63 
ANNEX 3: DETAILED ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS .................................................. 70 
ANNEX 4: GENDER ANALYSIS ............................................................................................... 72 
ANNEX 5: FAO ACTION PLAN TO ENHANCE E&S RISK AND IMPACTS COMPLIANCE ............... 74 
ANNEX 6: CLIMATE CO-BENEFITS ......................................................................................... 76 
ANNEX 7: WORLD BANK GROUP (WBG) COVID-19 COUNTRY PROGRAM RESPONSE NOTE - 
SOMALIA ............................................................................................................................. 77 
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 84 
 
DATASHEET 
 
      
BASIC INFORMATION – PARENT (Somalia Crisis Recovery Project - P173315) 
 
 
Country 
Product Line 
Team Leader(s) 
Somalia 
IBRD/IDA 
Ayaz Parvez 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Resp CC 
Req CC 
Practice Area (Lead) 
P173315 
Investment Project 
Financing 
SAEU3 (10208) AECE2 (6542) 
Urban, Resilience and Land 
  
Implementing Agency: Ministry of Finance, Federal Government of Somalia, Ministry of Planning, Investment and 
Economic Development, Federal Government of Somalia 
 ADD FIN TBL1 
Is this a regionally tagged 
project? 
 
No 
 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
 
No 
 
Approval Date 
Closing Date 
Expected 
Guarantee 
Expiration Date 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
15-May-2020 
31-May-
2024 
 
High 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Parent 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach [MPA] 
[✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[✓] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 84 
 
 
Development Objective(s) 
 
To support the recovery of livelihoods and infrastructure in flood and drought affected areas and strengthen 
capacity for disaster preparedness nationwide 
 
 
Ratings (from Parent ISR) 
 
RATING_DRAFT_NO 
 
 
 
 
Implementation 
Latest ISR 
 
28-Oct-2020 
24-Mar-2021 
Progress towards achievement of PDO 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Overall Implementation Progress (IP) 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Overall ESS Performance 
MS 
 
MU 
 
Overall Risk 
H 
 
H 
 
Financial Management 
S 
 
S 
 
Project Management 
S 
 
S 
 
Procurement 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
S 
 
S 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project - 
P176343) 
 
ADDFIN_TABLE 
Project ID 
Project Name 
Additional Financing Type 
Urgent Need or Capacity 
Constraints 
P176343 
Additional Financing to the 
Somalia Crisis Recovery 
Project 
Restructuring, Scale Up 
Yes 
Financing instrument 
Product line 
Approval Date 
Investment Project 
Financing 
IBRD/IDA 
25-Jun-2021 
Projected Date of Full 
Disbursement 
Bank/IFC Collaboration   
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 84 
 
30-Jun-2025 
No 
 
 
Is this a regionally tagged project? 
 
No 
 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Child 
 
 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[✓] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
[✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
 
 Disbursement Summary (from Parent ISR) 
 
Source of Funds 
Net  
Commitments 
Total Disbursed 
Remaining Balance 
Disbursed 
IBRD 
 
 
 
  
 
 % 
IDA 
 137.50 
  23.36 
 121.59 
    
 
16 % 
Grants 
 
 
 
  
 
 % 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project 
- P176343) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
SUMMARY (Total Financing) 
 
Current Financing 
Proposed Additional 
Financing 
Total Proposed 
Financing 
Total Project Cost 
137.50 
50.00 
187.50 
Total Financing 
137.50 
50.00 
187.50 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 84 
 
of which IBRD/IDA  
137.50 
50.00 
187.50 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILSNewFinEnh1- Additional Financing 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
50.00 
          IDA Grant 
50.00 
 
   
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Guarantee Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
0.00 
  50.00 
   0.00 
  50.00 
Crisis Response Window 
(CRW) 
0.00 
  50.00 
   0.00 
  50.00 
Total 
0.00 
50.00 
   0.00 
50.00 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
Does the project require any other Policy waiver(s)? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 84 
 
 
ESStandards 
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
ESStandardsNote 
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Urban, Resilience and Land 
 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Agriculture and Food 
Health, Nutrition & Population 
Social Sustainability and Inclusion 
Water 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 84 
 
PROJECT TEAM 
 
Bank Staff 
Name 
Role 
Specialization 
Unit 
Ayaz Parvez 
Team Leader (ADM 
Responsible) 
 
GFDRR 
Andrew James Roberts 
Team Leader 
Co-TTL 
SSIGL 
Haris Khan 
Team Leader 
Co-TTL 
SAEU3 
Francis Akolu Muthuiya 
Procurement Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
 
EAERU 
Leonard Mutuku Matheka 
Financial Management 
Specialist (ADM Responsible) 
 
EAEG1 
Nyabicha Omurwa Onang'o Financial Management 
Specialist 
 
EAEG1 
Haroub Ahmed Haroub 
Environmental Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
 
SAEE2 
Raymond Simon Maina 
Kirwa 
Social Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
 
SAES2 
Andre L. Carletto 
Team Member 
 
HAWH2 
Benjamin Joseph Kushner 
Team Member 
 
SAEU3 
Bernard O. Olayo 
Team Member 
 
HAEH2 
Carlos Rufino Costa Posada 
Team Member 
 
SAEU2 
Chantal Richey 
Team Member 
 
SAEW3 
Dahir Elmi Warsame 
Team Member 
 
SAES2 
Dilip Kumar Prusty Chinari 
Team Member 
 
WFACS 
Elad Shenfeld 
Team Member 
 
SLCUR 
Eugenia Nafula Konya 
Team Member 
 
AEMSO 
Gianni Zanini 
Team Member 
 
SAEU2 
Hamzah Saif 
Team Member 
 
GTFS1 
Hope Turyasingura 
Nanshemeza 
Team Member 
 
AECE2 
Howard William Bell 
Team Member 
 
SAEU3 
James Muli Musinga 
Team Member 
 
SAEA2 
Jean O Owino 
Team Member 
 
WFACS 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 84 
 
Joy Mildred Adhiambo 
Mboya 
Team Member 
 
AEMSO 
Julien Marie Francois 
Million 
Team Member 
 
SAEE3 
Late Felix Lawson 
Team Member 
 
WFACS 
Makoto Suwa 
Team Member 
 
SAEU2 
Mare Lo 
Team Member 
 
GFDRR 
Martin M. Serrano 
Counsel 
 
LEGAM 
Masood Ahmad 
Team Member 
 
ISAE1 
Masroor Ahmad 
Team Member 
 
SAWU1 
Maya Abi Karam 
Team Member 
 
LEGAM 
Michael John Hammond 
Team Member 
 
SAEE2 
Nadim Saghir 
Team Member 
 
SAWU1 
Naoko Ohno 
Team Member 
 
HAEH2 
Naomi Niroshinie Nayagam 
Team Member 
 
SAWU1 
Narayanan Edadan 
Team Member 
 
SAEU2 
Peter James Middlebrook 
Team Member 
 
SAWU1 
Samaneh Hemat 
Team Member 
 
SAES3 
Seraphine Nsabimana 
Team Member 
 
SAEU3 
Simon Peter Brooks 
Team Member 
 
SAEU2 
Toshihiro Sonoda 
Team Member 
 
SAWU1 
Tracy Hart 
Environmental Specialist 
 
SENDR 
Verena Phipps-Ebeler 
Social Specialist 
 
SAES2 
 
Extended Team 
Name 
Title 
Organization 
Location 
   
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 84 
 
I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
A. Introduction 
 
1. This Project Paper (PP) seeks the approval of the Executive Directors to provide an Additional Financing 
(AF) in the amount of US$50 million equivalent to the Federal Republic of Somalia (FGS) for the Somalia 
Crisis Recovery Project (SCRP, P173315). The original Grant of SDR 100.8 million (US$ 137.5 million 
equivalent) was approved on May 15, 2020 and became effective on June 29, 2020. The AF also entails a 
restructuring, that includes an extension of the closing date, a reallocation across component categories 
and changes to the results framework targets. 
 
2. The proposed AF will enhance the scope of the original project to include anticipatory action and 
immediate response activities to address the food insecurity crisis in Somalia, as well as undertake 
medium term recovery and resilience building activities. 
 
3. The SCRP’s Project Development Objective (PDO) is to: support the recovery of livelihoods and 
infrastructure in flood and drought affected areas and strengthen capacity for disaster preparedness 
nationwide. 
 
4. The SCRP comprises five components designed to work in the space of crisis recovery between 
humanitarian response and longer-term development. In doing so, it takes a gradual and phased 
approach that includes: (a) a surge of high-impact, early-recovery interventions for flood recovery, locust 
mitigation and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) response; (b) a gradual transition toward medium-
term recovery and resilience building through investments in infrastructure and longer-term disaster risk 
preparedness. The five components are: 
 
(a) Component 1: Immediate basic services and livelihood support with a focus on restoring basic 
services and livelihoods in the three flood affected states of Hirshabelle, South West, and Jubaland, 
whilst providing support to locust mitigation and resorting livelihoods of communities impacted by 
locusts nationally.  
 
(b) Component 2: Medium-term flood recovery including rehabilitating critical multi-sectoral 
infrastructure and assets damaged by the floods to improve standards of future disaster resilience.  
 
(c) Component 3: Longer-term disaster risk preparedness. Strengthening the capacity and 
preparedness of government to enable it to respond to future flood drought-related emergencies. 
This includes activities such as: i) hydromet and early warning systems; ii) a locust early warning 
system; iii) support for establishing a National Emergency Operations Centre, and; iv) flood risk 
management.  
 
(d) Component 4: Project Management. Supporting capacity development in the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) and Federal Member States’ (FMS) State Project Teams (SPTs) for the 
implementation of the Project, including procurement and financial management activities and 
audits, design and construction supervision, environmental and social monitoring quality 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 84 
 
assurance responsibilities, grievance redressal system, and monitoring and evaluation. 
 
(e) Component 5: Contingency Emergency Response. To provide support to the health sector to help 
mitigate the impact of COVID-19 through prevention and treatment activities nationally.  
 
5. SCRP implementation status. The Project is less than 12 months into implementation and underwent its 
first supervision mission in December 2020. The Project is making gradual but steady progress towards 
achieving its development objective. PDO achievement and implementation progress are both rated 
Moderately Satisfactory.  
 
6. As of May 6, 2021, the total project disbursements stood at US$23.6 million, representing 17 percent 
of the original grant in the amount of US$137.5 million. In addition, US$20 million in CERC funds have 
been approved and activated for the COVID-19 response. The Project is meeting its disbursement targets 
for this fiscal year, and with the soon anticipated withdrawal of CERC funds by FGS, and other planned 
activities, it is likely to stay ahead of planned disbursements for this fiscal year. Future delays in 
implementation due to the ongoing political crisis as result of the president’s term extension and delayed 
elections are possible, but to date no significant adverse effects have been felt. 
  
B. Rationale for Additional Financing, Restructuring and Proposed Changes 
 
Food Insecurity Crisis in Somalia 
 
7. It is projected that a minimum of two to three million people in Somalia are in acute need of food 
security and sustainable recovery support in Somalia. Three ongoing emergencies in Somalia are key 
drivers of its current food security crisis. Unusually erratic rainfall related to climate change with more 
frequent and extreme bouts of floods and drought, the prevailing Desert Locust (DL) infestation, and the 
COVID-19 pandemic have deepened existing vulnerabilities and weakened household resilience. 
Consequently, households are adopting negative coping mechanisms detrimental to livelihood asset and 
human capital accumulation.  
 
8. The effect on pasture and crop yields of less-than-average Deyr1 seasonal rainfall during the fourth 
quarter of 2020, a harsh dry season during the first quarter of 2021, delayed Gu2 seasonal rainfall in 
April 2021, and spotty and less-than-average rainfall for the rest of the season during the second 
quarter of 2021 is expected to worsen an already serious food insecurity across the country.  While at 
this stage the DL infestation has reduced and is limited to only some northern areas, the risk of new 
breeding and southward migration towards central and southern pasture and cultivated lands persists.  
As of April 2021, more than 80 percent of the country was experiencing moderate to severe drought 
conditions and at least 3.4 million people are expected to be affected by drought conditions through mid-
year.3    
 
9. The COVID-19 pandemic is also having significant indirect effects on food security, driven by the 
regional economic downturn and supply chain disruptions. Border closures have hurt trade, increased 
 
1 October-December rainfalls. 
2 July-September rainfalls. 
3 FAO SWALIM, April 22, 2021. Available at: https://www.faoswalim.org/. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 84 
 
prices of imported items including food, and reduced household incomes. This directly impacts on food 
security in pastoral and urban areas. Daily wages have fallen 30-40 percent below May 2019, and by 27-
33 percent compared to the five-year average. Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and urban households 
are expected to suffer a 20-30 percent decline in income.4  
 
10. The crisis will aggravate existing gender inequality and social risks. Somali women and girls, especially 
those with disabilities, face additional challenges as well as heightened risks of Gender-based Violence 
(GBV). Despite substantial investment in the treatment of acute malnutrition, seasonal assessments from 
the Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit (FSNAU) over several years show that the prevalence of 
acute malnutrition has remained above Serious, particularly for pregnant and lactating women suffering 
severe acute malnutrition as well as children under five: these two categories remain in the highest risk 
categories as food insecurity deepens across the country. The Government’s structural capacity to 
address malnutrition is next to non-existent. 
 
11. All 18 regions of Somalia are expected to have a high share of their population in Integrated Food 
Security Phase Classification (IPC) Crisis (IPC3) or Emergency (IPC4) phases of food insecurity. This 
ranges from 12 percent of the population in Middle Shabelle to a maximum of 34 percent in Banadir. 
More specifically, IPC3 outcomes are expected in Guban Pastoral, East Golis Pastoral of the Northwest, 
Togdheer Agropastoral, Coastal Deeh Pastoral of Central, Bay Bakool, and several of the riverine areas of 
Hiiraan, Middle Shabelle, and Middle and Lower Juba. Based on recent projections and staff estimates, 
assuming same level of humanitarian assistance to continue in 2021 compared to the preceding year, a 
large increase is expected from 1.6 million at the start of this year to a peak of 2. 2 million by mid-year in 
the number of people under IPC3 and 4.5 The estimated overall financing needs for Somalia to cope with 
this food insecurity crisis are in the range of US$300-400 million. Meanwhile, the current country 
response plan, which is heavily reliant on the UN’s US$1.09 billion 2021 Humanitarian Response Plan 
(HRP) is severely underfunded.6  
 
12. An additional grant of US$50 million has become available to the Federal Republic of Somalia under 
the World Bank’s newly established IDA Crisis Response Window (CRW)’s Early Response Financing 
(ERF) mechanism. This is part of the global Famine Action Mechanism (FAM) utilized by the World Bank, 
United Nations, and other global partners which is dedicated to supporting upstream interventions in 
famine prevention, preparedness, and early action. In July 2020, Somalia met the CRW ERF trigger based 
on food security forecasts. The forecast projected that 55 percent of people are expected to live in 
districts categorized as IPC 3+ over the coming four to eight months (through February 2021), 
representing a 36 percent increase from the conditions existing just prior to the breach of the threshold 
in July 2020. The trigger-based activation of the ERF was endorsed by the CRW ERF Technical Expert 
Group in August 2020, and a CRW Eligibility Note was accordingly prepared. Somalia’s eligibility to receive 
CRW ERF funds of US$50 million was confirmed by the Africa East Regional Vice President (AFEVP) in 
December 2020 and approved by the World Bank Board in January 2021.7 Since then, the food insecurity 
 
4 FEWSNET, Somalia Food Security Outlook February-September 2021. Available at: See: https://fews.net/east-africa/somalia. 
5 Based on the FEWS-NET Update dated March 2021 of the joint FEWS-NET and FSNAU Food Security Outlook February-
September 2021 and FAO-FSNAU-World Bank staff estimates.  See: https://fews.net/east-africa/somalia. 
6 OCHA allocated US$ 15 million from its CERF for complementary anticipatory-action interventions.  Following a pledging 
conference at end-April 2021, the FAO has received only pledges of US$38.8 million from its traditional donors against the 
agency’s own target under the HRP of US$126.6 million. 
7 The processing took more time than expected due to the CRW ERF being a new financing mechanism. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 84 
 
situation has generally continued and intensified in parts of the country through the combined effect of 
the three key drivers of food security, particularly including the onset and prevalence of drought 
conditions in many parts of the country. 
 
Rationale for SCRP as the Instrument of Choice for the World Bank’s Emergency Food Insecurity Response 
 
13. The SCRP offers the closest possible design elements, implementation arrangements and partnerships 
across partners to enable a quick and effective World Bank response The Project has set up a robust 
and well capacitated PIU located in the Federal Ministry of Finance (MOF) and co-managed and staffed 
with the Federal Ministry of Planning Investment and Economic Development (MOPIED) and is supported 
by the United Nations Office of Project Services (UNOPS). Focusing on addressing the key drivers of 
national food insecurity (locusts, floods, drought and the COVID-19 pandemic), the SCRP provides a 
unique multi-sector implementation platform, including via community-level outreach mechanisms, for 
supporting multi-crisis early response, preparedness and resilience strengthening in Somalia. 
Importantly, the SCRP PIU has the necessary contracting arrangements in place with key implementing 
partners, who have both the capability to manage and the on-the-ground reach to scale-up and deliver 
efficiently at a national level the priority activities needed for countering food insecurity. For instance, 
this is the case with existing FAO contract on the provision of livelihoods support for locust response. It 
is planned that around half of the AF proceeds will be utilized within one year of the effectiveness of the 
AF on anticipatory and early response interventions, while the remaining funds will be utilized 
progressively over the next couple of years on medium term recovery and rehabilitation of water and 
fisheries infrastructure. 
 
14. Approval of exception for AF for projects under implementation for less than 12 months. Since the 
SCRP has been under implementation for less than 12 months, an exception was required to process the 
AF for a project under implementation for less than 12 months under World Bank Procedures (AF for 
Investment Project Financing applying the World Bank Safeguards Policies). This exception was approved 
by the Regional Vice President (AFEVP) on April 26, 2021.   
 
15. Given the urgency to act, this AF is being processed as an emergency operation. This is pursuant to 
paragraph 12, Projects in Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints of Section III of 
the Bank Policy, Investment Project Financing and paragraph 56, Exceptional Arrangements in Situations 
of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints of Bank Directive, Investment Project Financing. The 
use of condensed procedures for preparation under Paragraph 12 was approved on February 9, 2021 
under the Project Concept Memorandum by the Somalia Country Director.  
 
Rationale for the Proposed Changes 
 
16. The key proposed changes under the project entail the inclusion of a food insecurity specific project 
component. This component will include both anticipatory action and immediate response activities to 
address the food insecurity crisis, as well as medium term recovery and resilience building activities.  The 
proposed set of activities entail both a scaling up of existing project activities like livelihoods support 
through the provision of agricultural inputs, but also include fishing inputs, and strengthening and 
rehabilitation of small to medium scale water and fisheries infrastructure while maximizing the use of 
labor intensive methods. This approach is backed by a strong whole-of-government consensus on 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 84 
 
utilizing the AF for scaling up the SCRP response in these areas, and premised on the need for avoiding 
overlaps and building upon ongoing humanitarian response activities in the areas of cash provision for 
food and a range of agro-pastoral production enhancement activities. Importantly, the proposed 
approach to split the AF across immediate response and medium term recovery and resilience building 
activities owes to the strong government resolve to make forays and advance its agenda for 
strengthening its medium to long term crisis preparedness, through a nationwide diversification of food 
sources and strengthening of water and fisheries infrastructure. The need for such an approach was 
further validated through consultations carried out during the AF preparation mission with a broad range 
of stakeholders including government ministries8, FMS, humanitarian partners, UN agencies and civil 
society networks. In this respect, the government is developing a comprehensive plan of action on 
addressing food insecurity as well as undertaking a mapping of partners and activities currently underway 
or planned by other actors. Annex 1 elaborates the broad strategic contours of the government’s under-
development Food Insecurity Response Strategy. In addition, with the support of the World Bank, the 
government has also initiated the development of a longer term Food Security Crisis Preparedness Plan 
(FCSPP), which will also entail multi-stakeholder consultations and is expected to be completed in the 
coming months. 
 
II. DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
A. Summary of Proposed Changes and Restructuring 
 
17. Enhanced Project Scope and Additional Activities. It is proposed that the original scope of the project is 
enhanced to include “anticipatory action” and “immediate response” activities to address the food 
insecurity crisis, as well as medium term recovery and resilience building activities. To this effect, a new 
sixth component on “Anticipatory and Recovery Support for Addressing Food Insecurity” will be added 
to the project. This will entail: (a) immediate livelihoods support through an ‘Inputs for Assets’ approach 
under which water supply, agricultural and fishing inputs will be provided to communities either 
unconditionally or in return for their participation in water and fisheries infrastructure, and; (b) 
strengthening and rehabilitation of existing small to medium scale water and fisheries infrastructure 
using regular (community) contracting mechanisms while maximizing the use of labor intensive methods. 
The project will ensure clarity of ownership and management arrangements of all community and local 
administrations’ assets to be rehabilitated under the Project, to ensure their adequate future operations 
and maintenance. In addition, given that the food insecurity crisis is spread across the entire country, the 
scope of the AF will be national, including Somaliland. However, appropriate implementation 
arrangements between the FGS and Somaliland will be discussed prior to implementation of the AF 
activities. This is similar to some of the original SCRP activities such as on locust control. 
 
18. Additional Project Management Costs. To cover the costs of project implementation and management 
for the new activities proposed under the AF, additional funds will be allocated to the project 
management component (component 4) of the parent project. Cost of component 4 will increase from 
US$ 5 million to US$ 11 million. 
 
8 Including MOPIED, MOF, Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MOAI), Ministry of Energy and Water Resources (MOEWR), 
Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs  and Disaster Management (MOHADM), Ministry of Public Works, Reconstruction and Housing 
(MPWR), Ministry of Livestock, Forestry and Range (MOLFR), and Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources (MFMR). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 84 
 
 
19. Closing Date. The implementation of the anticipatory and early response activities under the AF are 
anticipated to be substantially completed within 12 months of effectiveness of the AF. However, the 
medium term rehabilitation and resilience-building activities proposed under the AF, particularly in new 
sectors like fisheries, will add a considerable workload for the PIU and line ministries to the range of 
multi-sectoral activities envisaged under the parent project, some of which have already been slow in 
taking off.  Hence a 12-month extension of the original project closing date of May 2024 to May 2025 is 
proposed, for the adequate completion of both the original project activities and new activities under 
the AF.  
 
20. Results Frameworks. The PDO for the Additional Financing remains the same as the original project. 
Targets for some selected PDO indicators under the original SCRP Results Framework (RF) are proposed 
to be revised to reflect the expanded scope of activities and beneficiaries introduced under the 
Additional Financing. Additional indicators are proposed to be incorporated in the SCRP AF results 
framework to reflect the AF operations being added to the SCRP.  
 
B. Project Development Objective 
 
21. No revision to the original PDO is envisaged for the AF. The overall objective of the AF, to respond to 
immediate food insecurity needs, is covered adequately by the parent project’s PDO to support the 
recovery of livelihoods and infrastructure in flood and drought affected areas and strengthen capacity for 
disaster preparedness nationwide. 
 
C. Project Components 
 
22. The AF will add a sixth component to the original project summarized below. Annex 2 provides a more 
detailed description of the AF activities. 
 
23. Component 6: Anticipatory and Recovery Support for Addressing Food Insecurity (US$45 million 
equivalent). This component will include the following two sub-components: 
 
i. 
Sub-component 6a. Anticipatory Action and Early Response Support to Food Insecure Communities 
(US$22.5 million equivalent). This will include: (a) Immediate Rehabilitation of Small-Scale 
Community Irrigation and Water Supply Infrastructure, and; (b) Immediate Provision of Fishing Inputs 
and Infrastructure to Coastal Communities, and related training and awareness. These activities will 
be undertaken using the ‘Inputs for Assets’ approach under which agricultural and fishing inputs will 
be provided to communities in return for their participation in water and fisheries infrastructure. 
This component will also retain the option of providing agricultural and fishing inputs unconditionally 
to more vulnerable groups or if otherwise warranted by local circumstances. 
 
ii. 
Sub-component 6b. Medium-term Sustainable Recovery and Resilience of Food Insecure 
Communities (US$ 22.5 million equivalent). This will include the rehabilitation and reconstruction 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 84 
 
of, (a) Larger Drought-Mitigating Water and Irrigation Infrastructure9; (b) Fishing Coastal Community 
Infrastructure and Value Chain Resilience, and; (c) capacity building, training and awareness building 
of government and communities for recovery planning, scheme design, operation and maintenance 
and technical oversight for the planned water and fishery infrastructure works, and operation and 
maintenance under clear ownership and management arrangements. This component will employ 
routine design and contracting methods while maximizing the use of labor-intensive methods, where 
applicable.  
 
24. Additional allocation to Project Management Component (US$5 million equivalent). An additional 
allocation of US$5 million will be made to the original SCRP project management component 
(Component 4) to cover the costs of project implementation and management for the AF. The revised 
amount of component 4 will thus become US$11 million. 
 
D. PDO and Intermediate Results Indicators 
 
25. The PDO for the Additional Financing remains the same as the original project. Targets for some 
selected PDO indicators under the original SCRP Results Framework (RF) are proposed to be revised to 
reflect the expanded scope of activities and beneficiaries introduced under the Additional Financing.   
Additional indicators are proposed to be incorporated in the SCRP AF results framework to reflect the AF 
operations being added to the SCRP. These proposed changes are reflected in the project results 
framework, while Table 1 below lists the new indicators and revised targets for existing indicators 
proposed to be added at the PDO and intermediate outcome levels for the AF. The number of direct 
overall beneficiaries from the project as a result of the AF would be close to 2 million people, with a few 
more millions of indirect beneficiaries. 
 
Table 1: Existing and Revised Indicators be to be added under the AF 
Existing PDO Indicators 
Revised Description 
Previous Target 
Revised Target 
Number of people with 
improved access to livelihoods 
support 
Persons - benefiting from livelihood 
support; engaged in cash-for-work and 
unconditional cash grants; supported 
with agricultural inputs; obtained water 
and health services; and fishing inputs. 
1,203,650 - 1,719,500 
1,240,225 - 1,771,750 
Number of female-headed 
households benefiting from 
livelihood inputs 
Women or female-headed households 
benefiting from livelihood support; 
engaged in cash-for-work and 
conditional cash grants; supported with 
agricultural inputs; obtained water and 
health services; fishing inputs. 
116,375 - 166,250 
146,300 - 209,000 
Number of female-headed 
farming households benefiting 
from agricultural inputs 
Provision of seed packages, livestock 
feed-stocks and cash-for-work, and 
"Inputs for Assets". 
66,500 - 95,000 
66,500 - 109,250 
Number of households with 
access to improved 
infrastructure and basic services 
Households with improved access to 
roads, irrigation, health facilities, and 
water supply. 
1,608,192 - 2,297,417 
1,721,242 - 2,458,917 
 
9 This would include existing infrastructure damaged by conflict, natural disasters or infrastructure that may have fallen into 
disrepair due to neglect and deferred maintenance. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 84 
 
Number of female-headed 
households with access to 
improved infrastructure and 
basic service 
Female-headed households with 
improved access to roads, irrigation, 
health facilities, and water supply. 
804,096 - 1,148,708 
860,621 - 1,229,458 
New PDO Indicator 
Description 
Target 
Number of people benefiting 
from multiple-use of water 
services through periods of 
drought for domestic, livestock 
and agricultural use (new 
indicator) 
Water services that include zero-
emission standpipes or shallow wells 
with hand or solar pumps and watering 
troughs for livestock. Each type of use – 
domestic, livestock and agriculture to be 
computed with a composite index.  
116,375 - 166,250 
New Intermediate Indicators 
(Component 6: Anticipatory 
and Recovery Support for 
Addressing Food Insecurity) 
Description 
Target 
Number of persons with 
restored access to water supply  
Benefiting from rehabilitation and/or 
construction of community-level water 
points in rural areas, such as - small-
scale water catchments, wells, 
reservoirs, piped water schemes and 
irrigation canals; new small-scale soil 
infrastructure, such as soil bunds, gully 
control baskets, and stone walls to 
address soil erosion and improve 
moisture retention.  
232,750 - 332,500  
Number of households 
benefiting from agricultural 
inputs 
Provision of “Inputs for Assets” linked to 
agricultural communities.  
19,950 - 28,500  
Number of female-headed 
households benefiting from 
agricultural inputs 
Provision of “Inputs for Assets” linked to 
agricultural communities.  
9,975 - 14,250  
Number of households 
benefiting from fishing input 
Provision of fishing inputs linked to port 
communities. 
16,625 - 23,750  
Number of persons benefiting 
from rehabilitated coastal 
community  
6 port communities benefiting from 
fishing infrastructure - small jetty, cold 
storage, feeder roads to markets and 
fish markets. 
49,875 - 71,250  
Number of females benefiting 
from rehabilitated fisheries 
infrastructure  
Females engaged in processing, storing, 
selling, and so on, all on-shore activities 
19,950 - 28,500  
 
E. Theory of Change 
 
26. Figure 1 represents the proposed revisions to the SCRP’s Theory of Change as a result of the proposed 
AF, including the proposed additions and alterations.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 84 
 
Figure 1: SCRP AF Theory of Change 
 
 
F. Cross-Cutting Priorities 
 
a. Gender (and Community Engagement) 
 
27. Community involvement in preparedness activities and women’s participation is crucial. Enhancing 
women’s participation in decision making is crucial for building communities’ resilience to natural 
disasters and enhancing their participation in post disaster and recovery phases can have transformative 
effects on gender dynamics in Somalia. Although it often goes unnoticed, evidence demonstrates that 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 84 
 
women have an active role in disaster preparedness, response, and recovery efforts (United Nations 
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR), 2015). Providing women’s groups with training, resources, 
and the authority to engage in preparedness and emergency response would strengthen their position 
in the community and ensure more women get disaster preparedness and response information.  
 
28. Gender dynamics play a role in a wide range of factors associated with preparedness, response and the 
coping mechanisms associated with recovery. Women tend to perceive risks more saliently than men, 
but there is no clear evidence that this translates into greater preparedness action. The AF activities 
provide an opportunity to address possible gender gaps in decision making and capacity of women as it 
relates to medium term flood recovery activities and longer-term disaster risk preparedness. As a first 
step, given existing gaps in data, an assessment in specific project areas will be undertaken to understand 
the level of participation of women in local level committees (Water, Early Warning and Early Action 
Committees, others) as well as their barriers to participation. Thereafter, training programs planned 
under Component 2, Medium-term flood recovery and Component 3, Longer-term disaster risk 
preparedness, will be informed to include a targeted focus on improving decision making through 
increase in participation of women in relevant local committees and improved capacity.    
 
29. A detailed gender analysis is available in Annex 4. 
 
b. Climate Co-Benefits 
 
30. The SCRP AF is situated in a country characterized by substantial climate and disaster risks. Climate 
change will continue to be a major contributing factor to displacement and food insecurity in Somalia 
into the future. Droughts in Somalia are becoming more frequent and more prolonged, and the impacts 
of COVID-19 have only compounded this threat. Extreme climatic will affect marginalized and vulnerable 
groups more severely due to their low adaptive and coping capacities. 
 
31. The SCRP AF aims to address climate risks, foster resilience and help mitigate food insecurity. Climate 
change adaptation activities are hardwired into the project design. The AF will also take deliberate 
measures to maximize and assess climate co-benefits in implementing the multi-sectoral activities. This 
is in keeping with the Bank’s commitment of increasing its climate portfolio from 21 percent to 28 
percent which is also in line with the Bank’s Action Plan on Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience 
(World Bank, 2016).  
 
32. The information below articulates the direct link between the AF’s climate change vulnerability context 
and specific activities: 
 
a. Schemes implemented for income assistance for provision of water and irrigation supply, and for 
providing drought-resistant seeds and irrigation facilities, will support livelihoods restoration and 
will be designed to further improve beneficiaries’ resilience to climate change impacts.  
b. Provision of input packages to vulnerable households in remote coastal fishing communities, for 
example for the rehabilitation of small-scale landing sites, as well as other small-scale fisheries 
infrastructures, but also unconditionally in the aftermath of a major climate event. 
c. Improved resilience within small remote coastal communities will be achieved through more 
support to fishing communities and fishers, vendors and processors along the entire value chain, 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 84 
 
with the aim of developing skills, competencies and experience. 
d. Promotion and distribution of small-scale renewable energy powered equipment. 
 
33. A detailed climate co-benefit assessment can be found in Annex 6. 
 
G. Implementation Arrangements 
 
34. The SCRP builds on existing institutional structures to capacitate functional coordination between the 
state and federal levels of governmental agencies and flood-affected communities. With the addition 
of fisheries activities, the AF will further expand the institutional arrangements to include the Ministry of 
Fisheries and Marine Resources, while also building government and community capacities to support 
AF implementation. An overarching objective is to restore the legitimacy of the State and strengthen 
state-citizen trust. As an integral element of the SCRP, this AF will further promote coordination and 
cooperation both vertically and horizontally within the Government and with communities. The FGS will 
continue to maintain and update a detailed Project Operations Manual (POM) based on the additional 
activities proposed under the AF. The institutional implementation model described in the original PAD 
will support the implementation of the requested AF - see in Figure 2.   
  
Figure 2: SCRP AF Institutional Arrangements 
 
 
 
At the Federal Level   
 
35. Project Steering Committee (PSC). As part of the SCRP Project, the AF component will be overseen by a 
PSC chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) comprised of Directors 
General and/or Permanent Secretaries of the MOF, MOPIED, and FMS MOPIED. The PSC serves as an 
apex decision-making body responsible for broader strategic oversight, policy guidance, validation of 
broader resource allocation recommendations by the PIU, and other key decisions referred to it over 
time. However, the PSC will not be involved in routine operational decision making, such as project 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 84 
 
management or procurement decisions. The PSC is also mandated to approve state investment and 
procurement plans, conduct periodic implementation progress and compliance reviews, perform trouble 
shooting functions particularly in the event of disputes, liaise with high level law enforcement agencies 
to ensure project security, validate strategic course corrections recommended by the PIU and other 
project constituents, and validate PIU state performance assessments and performance-based 
allocations to states. 
 
36. Project Implementation Unit (PIU). The current Project PIU will be responsible for the implementation 
of the AF, as part of the broader SCRP Project. The PIU is mapped to the MOF and co-managed and co-
staffed by a combination of MOF and MOPIED personnel. It is responsible for project management, and 
coordination and implementation support to the FMS. These tasks include quality and process oversight, 
financial management, procurement, reporting and certification, contract management, M&E, security 
risk management (SRM) and ensuring World Bank environmental and social standards’ (ESS) 
compliance. For the AF, an immediate and priority task for the PIU would be to ensure timely and 
effective coordination between Federal and State Governments to facilitate prioritization, sequencing, 
investment planning and ensuring different sectoral line agencies to work together to implement the 
additional activities.  
 
37. Leveraging existing and successful partnerships. For the anticipatory and early recovery activities 
envisaged under the AF, the government will be encouraged to utilize and scale-up where possible, the 
existing contracting and partnership arrangements with the relevant UN agencies and civil society 
networks under the parent project.  The parent project has benefited immensely from engaging partners 
such as UN agencies and civil society networks on the early recovery activities (Component 1) and 
activating CERC (Component 5).  
 
38. Scaling up of these existing contracting arrangements will help ensure the provision of immediate and 
effective support to the people affected by the food insecurity crisis, without having to resort to forging 
altogether new implementation modalities for such early recovery activities. The PIU, FMS SPTs FGS and 
relevant FGS Ministries Departments and Agencies (MDAs), such as the Ministry of Water and Energy 
Resources and Ministry of Fisheries and Water Resources, will continue to supervise the implementation 
of activities of partners engaged by the PIU for providing such services. For the new component under 
the AF, the Project intends to further build the capacity of SPTs to enable them to perform these 
additional functions. New SPTs may also be constituted in FMS which currently lack such implementation 
mechanisms under the SCRP, on a needs basis.  
 
39. Citizen Engagement. The implementation of the AF will build on the strong citizen engagement principles 
underpinning the original implementation design of the SCRP. This includes through the engagement of 
potential International Non-Governmental Organization (INGO) and UN implementing partners, such as 
building on the partnerships established through the parent project. This will help ensure the use of well-
established processes of community engagement, which are both gender and conflict-risk sensitive.  The 
Project will ensure progressive social mobilization in respect of all project components through the use 
of existing community leadership and civil society networks, ensuring that communities are consulted at 
various stages of the subproject cycle, that is, identification, design, implementation, quality assurance, 
and impact evaluation. Communities will engage throughout project implementation, including in the 
monitoring of the implementation of project activities. Information boards, local meetings, and other 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 84 
 
forms of locally appropriate communication tools would be used for community-level information 
dissemination. A Community Scorecard exercise will be utilized to enable communities to provide formal 
feedback on overall project governance, including the performance of the targeting and the GRM. These 
activities are intended to generate evidence to contribute to improving policy and programs to enhance 
citizen engagement in local service delivery.    
 
40. Implementation Capacity Assessment and Strengthening. The World Bank undertook an initial 
assessment of FGS and FMS capacities to deliver the SCRP Project. This pointed to the need for capacity 
enhancement and skills transfers at both levels for project preparation and implementation. A hybrid 
strategy was thereby agreed under which the FGS contracted UNOPS to provide project management 
surge support during project preparation, and at least during the first two years of implementation, likely 
on a declining scale, while the Project will also enhance the capacity of the PIU and the SPTs where 
necessary. UNOPS provides on-the-job training and skills acquisition to the PIU, SPTs, and the FMS MDAs 
on procurement, contract management, environmental and social risk management, monitoring and 
evaluation, SRM and reporting, engineering, GBV, grievance redressal, and so on. The PIU has designated 
a focal point on environmental and social risk management and has initiated the procurement of 
dedicated environmental, social, GBV and SRM experts.    
 
H. Lessons Learned from Parent Project 
 
41. Increasing sensitization amongst key government Ministries towards greater PIU empowerment. Initial 
delays in project implementation have been attributed to the lack of adequate empowerment and 
functional delegation to the PIU to make timely operational and procurement decisions. Project 
instruments, including the legal grant agreement together with associated documentation, such as the 
POM, are clear on the project’s institutional and governance arrangements. Moreover, the joint project 
management relationship established under the project PIU between the MOF and MOPIED is working 
very well. However there remains a critical need to improving the functional delegation to the PIU to 
make timely operational and procurement decisions. This approach will be continued to ensure effective 
implementation of the activities under the proposed AF.  
 
42. Institutionalizing Communities of Practice, where these do not already exist. To maintain  
complementarity and synergies with other development and humanitarian partners, the Project team 
within the first month of implementation agreed that there is a dire need for enhanced coordination and 
synchronization across partner activities at the policy, strategic and operational level in dealing with the 
multiple crises that Somalia is confronted with. It was agreed to map the partner landscape, set up 
technical working groups, and develop and operationalize joint actions plans, including for flood risk 
management, hydrological and meteorological (hydromet) services through the Hydromet Working 
Group, National Emergency Operation Center, locust response, food insecurity, COVID-19, displacement, 
and so on. Communities of practice have already been set up with regular meetings been held on M&E, 
on Infrastructure, hydromet, and investment planning. This approach has been advancing coordination 
by synchronizing and realizing the potential for complementarity across partner activities and particularly 
towards strengthening humanitarian-development collaboration across the multiple crisis responses 
that Somalia is currently undertaking. The communities of Practice will also be leveraged to inform 
implementation of AF activities.  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 84 
 
43. Facilitating bottom-up planning and accountability. Guided by the Project POM, the Government has 
been able to quickly prioritize investments under SCRP using a bottom-up, systematic, and criteria-based 
sectoral and geographic prioritization and investment planning process. This process was inclusive and, 
in each state, involved consultations with community representation in the form of local Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGOs). This process has informed state-level annual work plans and 
budgets. This decision-making model under the Project has helped create confidence in government 
decision-making using an evidence-based approach, while supporting a high degree of cooperation and 
coordination between the FGS and FMS.  Utilizing and further strengthening these processes to prioritize 
and sequence AF related needs, including “quick win” investments based on existing designs, and 
developing systematic work planning regimes for the new project component will be a key determinant 
of the success of the AF. 
 
44. Facilitating regular dialogue between senior leadership of the PIU and UN Agencies to support 
compliance with World Bank Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) requirements. The Project 
team found that initial delays in implementation by UN implementing partners of requirements under 
ESF were more quickly resolved through direct engagement between senior leadership at the PIU and 
UN agency level. With SCRP setting in place a new precedent where the Government of Somalia is in the 
driver’s seat, for the first time after decades, as the direct recipient of funds to implement large scale 
disaster management and response activities, the dynamic between the UN agencies in Somalia and 
Federal and State Government is evolving. A gradual change in ways of working is taking place in Somalia 
with UN agencies becoming accountable to the FGS in implementation of activities under the SCRP. 
Unlike with other implementing partners who are private sector contractors or INGO consortiums, with 
UN implementing partners in particular, this lesson learned of direct and frequent dialogue between 
senior leadership had proved most effective at ensuring comprehensive reporting, documentation and 
compliance with World Bank ESF requirements.  
 
I. Alignment with Higher Level Objectives 
 
45. The new component proposed under the SCRP AF to address the food insecurity crises in Somalia and 
are fully aligned with relevant government, World Bank Group (WBG) and partner strategies. While 
the FGS does not yet have a fully developed response plan specific to this crisis, the proposed project 
activities are in support of the Government’s National Development Plan (NDP-9, 2020-24), which builds 
on the Somalia Recovery and Resilience Framework (RRF) and serves as an overarching framework for 
development priorities in Somalia. This includes alignment with the 2020 Mutual Accountability 
Framework, the UN Strategic Framework, the Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework, as well as 
the National Water Resource Strategy, 2021-2025 and Roadmap and draft fisheries legal frameworks, 
such as the draft Fisheries Bill, National Fisheries Policy, and Fisheries Master Plan. 
 
46. The AF activities also align with the International Development Association (IDA) 19 core priorities, the 
WBG’s twin goals and its Fragility Conflict & Violence (FCV) strategy. The proposed AF is closely 
associated with the WBG’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity by 
addressing the food security needs of the most vulnerable and poorest segments of society. It is also well 
aligned with the FCV Special Theme of IDA 19 that aims to further strengthen IDA’s effectiveness in 
Fragile and Conflict-affected Situations, supporting countries to escape the fragility trap and exploiting 
IDA’s comparative advantage at the security-development nexus. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 84 
 
 
47. Further, the AF activities also align with the WBG’s Country Partnership Framework for Somalia (FY19-
22) (CPF, Report No. 124734), with its strong focus on poverty alleviation and resilience building; 
namely: (i) strengthening institutions and expanding access to services; and (ii) building Somalia’s 
structural resilience to fragility and shocks. The AF activities will also complement, with quick impact and 
disaster risk management elements, the key World Bank-funded projects that are already active in 
Somalia including the Shock Responsive Safety Nets for Human Capital Project (P171346), the Urban 
Resilience Project II (P170922), and the Biyoole or Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience 
Project (P167826), all of which aim to build long-run resilience at the community level. 
 
48. The Project is aligned with the World Bank’s climate change and resilience agenda. In the Action Plan 
on Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience, the World Bank acknowledges the urgency of the 
development impacts of climate change, especially in FCV countries. It commits to scaling up adaptation 
efforts to build resilience against climate and disaster impacts,  with a focus on interventions that directly 
target and engage with vulnerable population groups, informed by greater access to climate, weather 
and hydrological information. 
 
III. KEY RISKS 
 
A. Overall Risk Rating and Explanation of Key Risks 
 
49. Somalia is one of the most difficult FCV environments in the world in which to operate, with the socio-
political construct, as well as conflict and security, presenting serious challenges to project 
implementation. Through the engagement of the specialist security risk management provider, the 
Project is developing a proportional risk mitigation regime, not least to address issues of Security Risk 
Management (SRM) and GBV.  
 
50. The overall risk rating for the SCRP, including for the proposed AF remains High. The risks that could 
adversely affect the Project are contextual, political, institutional, and programmatic. The Government 
has some familiarity with World Bank investment operations requirements, though their capacity both 
in the Federal Government and at FMS-level to manage full-lifecycle project delivery and supervision 
activities remains generally weak. The SCRP PIU is gradually developing critical risk management skills 
through the implementation of the Project.   
 
51. Political and Governance risks are High. A unique socio-political dynamic exists in Somalia within a 
contested political space. In February 2020 Somalia's president signed legislation that would allow 
ordinary Somalis to vote in parliamentary elections, for the first time. The holding of a one-person, one-
vote election has been developed as a replacement for “clan-based power-sharing”. Historically, this has 
given rise to tensions between the FGS and key FMS, although recent positive political developments 
have improved the situation. Given the institutional arrangements under the SCRP, there is a distinct risk 
that the sensitive political environment could have a detrimental impact on the Project level, including 
the proposed AF. Mitigating such risks is largely beyond the influence of the World Bank and its partners. 
However, the SCRP Project Team will continue regular and systematic efforts to encourage collective 
Project action at the technical levels in the FGS and FMS to sustain activity beyond any political 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 84 
 
turbulence. This will include regular communication on project activities, allocations, skills transfers and 
functional operational processes. A robust SRM approach is being promoted through the risk 
management consultant, which is embedded in the PIU and seeks to mitigate any immediate effects to 
the Project of developing hostile environment. 
 
52. The Macroeconomic Risk is Substantial. Somalia is one of the world’s poorest countries, with a gross 
national income of US$284 million. Some 80 percent of its exports are from one product, livestock, 
leaving it exceptionally prone to external economic shocks. The substantial dependency of the FGS upon 
donor funding underlines the fiscal fragility and weak revenue base. The World Bank, working with others 
such as the International Monetary Fund, is engaged in strengthening the overall macroeconomic and 
fiscal framework. The project design builds in flexibility such that activities can be adjusted accordingly, 
contingent on the overall environment.  
 
53. Sector Strategies and Policy Risks are Substantial. Risks related to the development and implementation 
of the sector strategies relevant to the project remain substantial. In particular, the government needs 
to strengthen its strategy on food crisis management and preparedness that acknowledges the need for 
anticipatory and early actions for addressing immediate food insecurity needs. It also needs to embark 
on a path of developing and implementing multi-hazard preparedness policies and systems with 
predictable financial resources and the requisite human and skill development. Given Somalia’s recurrent 
history of droughts and food insecurity, particular emphasis needs to be placed on food insecurity 
preparedness. Both the original project and AF provide concrete opportunities and explicit resources for 
strengthening the country’s disaster preparedness strategy, plans and systems. 
 
54. Technical Design Risk is Substantial. Given the complexities of design of new fisheries and water 
infrastructure, in a highly complex environment that comprises many political, security, technical 
capacity and governance challenges, a substantial rating is warranted. This includes weak capacity 
generally in the country for technical design, procurement, construction and supervision activities. The 
design of the project builds in significant technical capacity building efforts to create an effective project 
platform, such as the use of project management and design support through UNOPS and outsourcing 
design and supervision to qualified external partners and firms, which will help maintain technical design 
risks for the AF. Field-level risk mitigation exists, in the form of INGO consortia partnering with the SCRP 
PIU and is proving an obvious resource for offsetting some of the technical design and community 
engagement challenges. The field level presence and local experience of INGO consortia will also be 
leveraged to maximize the benefits of the new components introduced under the AF. In addition to 
capacity injection outsourcing of technical designs for example, drawings, Bill of Quantities, Bill of 
Engineering measurement and evaluation, and so on, of large water infrastructure under sub-component 
2a will also mitigate the technical design risk of the MDAs and PIU.   
 
55. The Institutional Capacity Risk is Substantial. Capacity and authority in Somalia are relatively weak given 
the history of conflict, fragmented governance boundaries and a deep mistrust of public institutions. 
Conforming to the new draft guidelines of the Civil Service Commission, the project continues to ensure 
the recruitment of the best technical consultants at both PIU and FMS levels, to create a sufficiently 
attractive technical environment in which the best available staff are being identified and retained. The 
relative scarcity of qualified human resources in Somalia is proving a challenge in the recruitment 
processes for certain posts.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 84 
 
 
56. The Fiduciary risk is rated high. The FM and procurement environment in Somalia remain inadequate. 
The financial management risk is assessed as High. Financial management capacity challenges that are 
likely to affect the project exists. The ‘High’ risk rating is largely attributable to a) country specific 
weak/evolving rudimentary funds flow and banking systems particularly at the implementation level in 
Somalia - characterized by Anti Money Laundering and Anti -Terrorism Financing risks. They also include 
lack of key financial management competencies and internal controls, reliance on consultants, lack of 
regulatory framework for key Public Financial Management (PFM) aspects amongst others. Various 
mitigating measures are designed both specific to the project and as part of other World Bank/Donor 
engagements in the country. Mitigation measures for governance issues have been built into the project 
design in the form of strict fiduciary control mechanisms and application of World Bank fiduciary rules, 
as well as through targeted participatory and consultative mechanisms for project activities and a focus 
on social accountability. The project, (a) has a dedicated financial management and procurement 
specialist with experience in World Bank policies with the ability to provide embedded capacity building 
within the PIU; (b) includes in the POM a well-described financial management procurement process; 
and (c) includes a requirement for oversight as part of the third party/ community based monitoring as 
well as social accountability d) demands risk based implementation support reviews e) is strengthening 
the financial management capacities of the PIU and External Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS) units 
through on the job-training and formal PFM trainings.   
 
57. Environmental and Social (E&S) risk is High. The parent project is rated high risk on E&S and this will be 
retained under AF. The key AF activities that can pose environmental risks include: Rehabilitation of 
Small-Scale Community Irrigation and Water Supply Infrastructure using “Inputs for Assets” Modalities, 
Provision of Fishing Inputs and Infrastructure to Coastal Communities, Rehabilitation and Reconstruction 
of Larger Drought-Mitigating Water and Irrigation infrastructure, reconstruction of high priority small-
scale fish jetties and other landing infrastructure, processing and handling centers. Potential 
environmental issues associated with the vast majority of proposed activities are not expected to be 
significant, as investments will involve rehabilitation and reconstruction of existing infrastructure only. 
Still some adverse impacts may be possible for infrastructure sub-projects depending on the specifics of 
each site, especially those that involve new physical works10  or changes in the sites or in high-risk areas. 
Some aspect of Fishing Coastal Community Infrastructure component will potentially involve hazardous 
work due to working near, in or above water. In addition to these construction-related environmental 
effects, risks, and hazards, the operation phase will have potential effects on the environment as well as 
health and safety risks and hazards associated with fish processing and storage facilities. The ESIA will 
explore these potential impacts, risks and hazards, and propose the necessary mitigation measures and 
monitoring plans. 
 
58. Key social risks include: a) ensuring security for project operations, project workers and the beneficiary 
communities; b) exclusion of vulnerable, marginalized and minority members of the community from 
project benefits amplified by the context of limited resources against widespread need; c) selection bias 
and elite capture, where project benefits are diverted to less-vulnerable individuals and locations; d) 
challenges in access to beneficiaries for meaningful community engagements and difficulty in monitoring 
social harm where it has occurred; e) inward migration to targeted districts for project benefits and labor 
 
10 Such physical works will necessarily exclude any works that that use or risk polluting international waterways. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 84 
 
opportunities, which may upset community dynamics and perpetuate social and environmental fragility; 
f) sexual exploitation and abuse, sexual harassment (SEA/SH) and other forms of GBV; g) systemic 
weakness in the capacity of government to identify, understand and prevent adverse social impacts on 
the project, and; (h) displacement impacts and restrictions to land use associated with water supply and 
fishing input infrastructure. All risk mitigation measures are detailed in the appropriate ESF instruments. 
 
59. Stakeholders’ Risk is High. Opposition from some stakeholders (civil society, private sector 
organizations, al-Shabaab, and other members of the general public), in light of the sectarian nature of 
the conflict and violence, could have a negative impact on the achievement of the PDO. The project 
objectives are, however, clear and through a people-centered approach, use of trusted implementing 
partners, the support of a SRM company and a targeted communications strategy, they should generally 
be well understood by an all stakeholders.  
 
60. Security Situation Risk is High. Much of Somalia is subject to conflict and sporadic violence, which affects 
access to locations, insecurity for staff and communities. Mitigation measures have been developed and 
include: the engagement of a specialist risk management service provider to directly support the PIU in 
the entirety of the SRM functions across the Project. The service provider has developed a Security 
Management Plan and is proposing a comprehensive SRM approach to identify, manage and mitigate, to 
the extent possible, security risks pertaining to all levels of the Project. Standard operating procedures, 
to include a security decision-support system for government as well as further training on risk analysis 
and monitoring for the PIU is being implemented as part of a robust SRM approach within the SCRP. 
 
61. The reputational risk to the World Bank is Substantial. Reputational risks also exist for the FGS, 
particularly in relation to INGOs and UN agencies implementing on behalf of the Government. Risk 
mitigation through safeguards will help to ensure the Project’s success and protect the World Bank’s 
reputation. FGS’ reputational risk is being progressively mitigated through a memorandum of 
understanding 
with the 
Government 
to 
agree 
on 
key 
principles 
of 
engagement, 
for 
example, Government positioning and communication, together with the need for establishing a 
harmonized beneficiary registry / targeting methodology. It is important that the FGS is seen by citizens 
to be relevant delivering services to through inclusive and bottom-upwards local planning processes. 
 
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
A. Economic and Financial Analysis 
 
62.  The economic viability of the proposed interventions under the AF have been assessed through a cost-
benefit analysis. A simplified cost-benefit analysis, where the direct costs and the monetary value of 
selected benefits are compared, was performed to assess the economic viability of the proposed 
interventions, while also considering intangible returns. Such analysis allows an appraisal of the net 
present value (NPV) and the economic internal rate of return (IRR) of projects in a consistent and 
comparable manner.  
 
63. The computation of the NPV and the IRR of the AF reveals that the interventions featured under the 
project are economically viable under the baseline scenario, as well as under less favorable conditions. 
The economic analysis is performed across all the 4 activities included in Components 6a and 6b of the 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 84 
 
AF, to measure the short- to medium-term positive impacts of the proposed interventions. An annual 
discount rate of 6 percent is assumed, which is the time value of money (that is, the opportunity cost of 
capital), for Somalia. The activity horizon is assumed to be 10 years. The sensitivity analysis, where each 
finding is observed under less favorable conditions such as, for example, a 10 percent increase in costs 
or a 10 percent decrease in benefits to test for robustness, indicates that the NPV remains significant and 
that the IRR remains above the annual discount rate of 6 percent. The results of the economic analysis 
are presented in Table 2 below, with a detailed presentation of the analysis featured in Annex 3.  
 
Table 2: Sensitivity Analysis of Interventions 
  
Activities under Component 6a 
Activities under Component 6b 
NPV (US$) 
IRR (%) 
NPV (US$) 
IRR (%) 
Baseline scenario  
37,168,911  
54.7 
30,893,454 
39.6 
Costs increase by 10% 
34,885,111  
47.4 
28,760,226 
35.0 
Benefits reduce by 10% 
31,168,220  
46.6 
25,670,880 
34.5 
Benefits lag by two years 
15,376,697  
17.8 
22,140,339 
25.2 
Source: Based on World Bank staff calculations. 
 
B. Technical 
 
64. The Project’s technical appraisal confirms the need for a rapid response to growing food insecurity. 
The appraisal validated the urgent need for anticipatory and early response actions to address Somalia’s 
increasing food security as well as nutrition-related crisis risks. It also confirmed that unless addressed 
adequately, the drivers of Somalia’s food security conditions ranging from COVID-19 and Desert Locusts 
to climatic events, such as the most recent and forecasted below average rainfall, will continue to 
exacerbate an already dire food insecurity crisis. In this respect, one key activity to be fast tracked by the 
government include the development of an action plan for immediate food insecurity response, 
particularly including the implementation arrangements and partnership modalities for undertaking 
immediate crisis response and anticipatory action.  Given the urgency to furnish a quick and substance 
response to the immediate crisis needs, the Government has also been encouraged to include in this 
action plan, activities that it would like to commence immediately which the AF can retroactively finance 
upon project effectiveness. 
 
65. The SCRP is already being implemented through multiple institutions necessary to realizing a whole-
of-government approach for early recovery. The SCRP PIU has convening ability to bring all stakeholders 
to work together on this agenda, including the finance, planning, water, agriculture, and disaster 
management ministries. It also brings together partners like FAO (the leading UN agency on food 
insecurity early warning systems), one of several SCRP avenues that could be quickly scaled for utilizing 
ERF funding in partnership with FGS. SCRP also provides the option of using its partnerships with civil 
society consortia to extend quick additional support to food-insecure communities.  
 
66. The proposed AF design and approach will significantly aid food security. The World Bank’s technical 
and sector experts involved in the preparation of the AF are satisfied with the FGS’s multi-disciplinary 
emergency response to food insecurity. The infrastructure interventions will be based on detailed 
assessments, including technical, geophysical surveys, complemented by local community knowledge, 
and prioritize “quick wins” by fast-tracking existing designs, as feasible. Technical assessments will be 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 84 
 
carried in consultation with different stakeholders to (i) prioritize the interventions; (ii) make informed 
decision about typology of infrastructure; (iii) allocate resources to the interventions and determine 
geographical scope (the scope of the AF will be national, including Somaliland, however appropriate 
implementation arrangements will be discussed between the FGS and Somaliland prior to 
implementation of the AF activities); and (iv) define implementation modalities and schedules. The 
infrastructure under component 6(a) will be primarily implemented through community engagement 
under inputs for community assets’ modalities. PIU and relevant MDAs, including the FGS and FMS 
Ministry of Water and Energy Resources and Ministry of Fisheries and Water Resources, will lend 
technical support and implementation supervision of community work for robust and quality outputs in 
line with the national technical standards. Under sub-component 6(b) design and supervision will be 
through third-party engineers with close backstopping from MDA and the PIU, while construction will be 
contracted to qualified contractors. The AF will concurrently build Government preparedness and 
coordination capacity and supporting the analytical and policy basis for enhancing food security. 
 
67. Supporting government-led and community-supported infrastructure operations and maintenance 
(O&M) regimes. The Project’s technical appraisal confirms the need for supporting institutional capacity 
building with multiple tiers of MDAs government tiers (federal and state) in the areas of multi-sector 
recovery planning, implementation, coordination and civic engagement. The proposed AF will build the 
capacity of government to effectively engage in and lead the SCRP AF, as well as more broadly to lead 
and sustain recovery coordination. As government capacity increases, the Project aims to focus on 
sustainability and productivity of the SCRP AF’s completed infrastructure through active support of 
citizens and project beneficiaries. As mentioned earlier the project will heavily engage with beneficiary 
households and communities under the ‘assets for inputs’ approach and will also build their capacity in 
O&M of infrastructure created or rehabilitated or inputs provided under the SCRP AF.  
 
68. The O&M for the proposed infrastructure activities would be challenging in the operational context of 
Somalia. In the technical discussion with PIU and relevant MDA, the World Bank has emphasized strong 
commitments to ensure sustainability of the schemes undertaken as part of the AF. PIU will lead, with its 
partners, in designing and placing appropriate mechanisms, either community based or through 
strengthening of federal /state structures, or a combination of both ensuring sustained O&M regime 
leading to sustainability of completed infrastructure projects both under AF and SCRP. The project team 
will ensure best practices in O&M in other FCV contexts are adapted to Somalia. In respect to the 
provision of fishing assets, such as refrigerated trucks, the team will elaborate and clarify ownership, 
management, operations and maintenance aspects in the Project Paper to ensure long-term viability of 
all activities undertaken.   
 
69. The need to retain flexibility to adapt to dynamic and evolving needs. Maintaining flexibility of the 
Project will allow the FGS the ability to regularly re-prioritize between the various activities against ever-
changing conditions and needs on the ground. The technical appraisal of the AF also indicated the need 
for maintaining flexibility of resource allocation across various sub-components, as well as using target 
ranges for results indicators instead of absolute values, to allow room for strategic and operational 
course corrections during implementation.  
 
70. Project investments will be based on the ongoing process of prioritization and sequencing developed 
through the parent project. Therefore, there the technical team has a high degree of confidence that 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 84 
 
further prioritization and targeting of the AF will be based on such systematic prioritization of needs 
Through this process, all the investments in infrastructure will be designed to climate resilient standards, 
that is, planned, designed, built, and operated in a way that anticipates, prepares for, and adapts to 
changing climate conditions. The reconstruction and rehabilitation of water and fisheries infrastructure 
under the AF will support climate change adaptation by being informed by risk mapping to ensure climate 
resilience in the building locations and construction standards. Adaptive operation and maintenance 
management approaches will also be incorporated to include flexibility from the outset to monitor and 
adjust to changing conditions over the lifetimes of the newly reconstructed assets. Flood risk 
management and community preparedness plans will also draw on risk mapping and identify measures 
to anticipate, prepare for, and adapt to changing climate conditions.  
 
71. The proposed AF has undergone the required climate and disaster risk screening and has been assessed 
for climate co-benefits (Annex 6). The investments under this Project will provide substantial climate co-
benefits both because (i) the provision of livelihood support and rehabilitation of critical infrastructure 
and services will help to improve the well-being, economic prospects, and quality of life for some of the 
most vulnerable people; thereby improving their capacity to cope with climate-induced stressors, (ii) the 
policies, plans, and infrastructure investments themselves will be designed and constructed in a resilient 
manner, and (iii) the strengthening of Government capacities to coordinate and prepare for changing 
climate conditions, including the consolidation of early warning information.  
 
C. Financial Management 
 
72. Given the consideration for Use of Country Systems (UCS), the project will adopt the UCS in various 
aspects of the project’s financial management. These include accounting and reporting, banking, 
oversight arrangements with the Office of the Auditor General and FM staffing. This will be supported by 
Technical Assistance (TA) with clear requirement for knowledge transfer incorporated in the Term of 
Reference. The External Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS), already established under the Office of the 
Accountant General and staffed with mainstream civil servants in consultation with the FGS Ministry of 
Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management (MOHADM) will oversee and manage the project 
financial management. The EAFS unit has been fully operational at FGS for the last 6 years. The current 
staffing the Somalia Crisis Response Project will be used to manage the additional financing proceeds. 
The EAFS and the PIU staff will be trained on World Bank FM procedures. Throughout the implementation 
of the project, the Government is expected to ensure the EAFS and PIU are staffed with professionals 
with relevant and adequate qualification and experience acceptable to the World Bank. The EAFS will 
work closely with the UN Agencies which will be contracted by Government to implement part of the 
project components.  
 
73. The FM arrangements for the AF will mirror the arrangements under the parent project. The FM risk 
rating is high given the expansion of the program beneficiaries and the addition of the Ministry of Fishing, 
which is not covered by the parent operation. The Office of the Accountant General and Auditor General 
will be central counterparts in the management and oversight of FM arrangements and the 
implementation of risk mitigation measures. In line with smart fiduciary principles and like the parent 
project, FM arrangements additional financing are centralized and managed by special units, the External 
Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS), headed by the EAFS Director and reporting to the Accountant 
General. The EAFS units are designed to ensure harmonization, donor coordination, reduction in 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 84 
 
duplication, fragmentation, and proliferation of development partners-specific FM units. To foster 
sustainability, the EAFS units are staffed with mainstream civil servants supported by targeted TA with 
clear Terms of Reference outlining measures to promote knowledge transfer and an exit strategy. The 
FGS’ Office of Auditor General, with support of a qualified and registered practicing audit TA firm, are 
responsible for project audits. Given the high risks, special reference and attention will be made to 
International Standards on Auditing (800)- Auditor’s Report on Special Purpose Audit Engagements.   
 
74. Budgeting Arrangements. The PIU will continue to work in close consultation with the Budget Director 
at the Ministry of Finance, External Assistance Fiduciary Section technical implementation units to (i) 
prepare cash projection for the AF, (ii) request for adequate budget allocation for anticipated 
disbursements and expenditures during FY21 and the outer years, and (iii) as necessary process UN 
Commitments based on the amended output agreement signed between the Government and relevant 
UN agencies. As with the parent project, before the projected estimates are incorporated in the 
Government Appropriation bills, they will be submitted to the World Bank Group Task Team Leader (TTL) 
for the necessary review and approvals. The work plans, cash flow projections, and budget include the 
project activities, amounts according to the Government financial year analyzed by month and quarter 
delineated by components and categories including any applicable UN Commitments allocations. The TTL 
cleared budget and projected annual disbursements will be ‘on-budget’. The analyzed budgets will be 
posted into the respective Financial Management Information Systems (FMIS) according to the approved 
Standard Chart of Accounts (SCoA). The share of project financing will be integrated into the parent 
project and posted by appropriate SCoA funding source to facilitate generation of project periodic 
reports by funding source. The integrated project’s budget utilization reports shall be prepared from 
Government(s) FMIS as a sub-set of the Government Treasury Single Account (TSA) fiscal reports. 
 
75. Flow of Funds and Banking Arrangements. The AF will be channeled through the existing project 
Designated Account (DA) at Central Bank of Somalia (CBS). All the expenditures for the parent project 
and additional financing incurred through the DAs and as well as those submitted through client 
connection for direct payments will be justified, supported and eligible as defined in the Project Appraisal 
Document (PAD) and the financing agreement(s). All project withdrawal applications will be made in US 
Dollars (USD) and will be submitted online through the client connection portal. Replenishment and 
reimbursement Withdrawal Applications will be accompanied by Statements of Expenditures (SOEs) in 
accordance with the procedures established in the disbursement Letter and the Disbursement 
Guidelines. Detailed disbursement arrangements will be documented in the Disbursement Letters. The 
EAFS Unit in consultation with Director General and alternate signatories will institute adequate controls 
in the management of the DAs. The signatories to the DAs (Treasury Cheques/Payment 
Instructions/Electronic Funds Transfer- EFT). The DA will be operated in line with the established DA 
mandates for the parent project.  
 
76. Accounting and internal control arrangements. The AF will be accounted for on a cash basis in line with 
the arrangements under the existing project. These will be supported with appropriate records and 
documentation to track commitments and to safeguard assets. The project budgets and expenditure will 
be classified to facilitate the preparation of relevant reports and financial Statements, including 
information on total project expenditures, total expenditure on each project component/activity, and 
analysis of that total expenditure into various categories of goods, training, consultants and other 
procurement and disbursement categories. The project FM arrangements are spelled out in the EAFS 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 84 
 
Manuals which are being phased out and replaced with Comprehensive Operations and Accounting 
Procedures Manuals (COPAM)11, a move aimed at strengthening the use of county systems. The 
accounting records will be maintained in USD and integrated with the parent project. Similar to the 
parent project, the additional financing activities will be mapped to the Government FMIS using the SCoA 
to facilitate recording and reporting of all the project financial information, including information on total 
project expenditures, total expenditure on each project component/activity, and analysis of that total 
expenditure into various categories. All the project financial management records will be maintained in 
hard copied at the EAFS as well as in electronic format archived in the FMIS.  
 
77. Financial Reporting Arrangements. All project financial reports (parent and additional financing) will be 
generated directly from a single integrated window through Government FMISs and as a sub-set of the 
various authorities TSA fiscal summary reports. Quarterly Interim unaudited Financial Report (IFRs) will 
be prepared by the EAFS in consultation with the PIU and will cover all project funds. For purposes of 
monitoring project implementation progress, the reports shall be submitted to the World Bank within 45 
days after the end of the quarter. The reports will cover all funds received under the project (parent and 
additional financing). The formats and contents of the financial progress reports are designed into the 
FMISs.   
 
78. External Auditing. Consistent with audit arrangement for the parent project, the FGS Office of the 
Auditor General has the overall responsibility to carry out independent audit of the project. The project 
(parent and additional financing) will support the engagement of an external audit technical assistance 
to work with the staff of the Office of the Auditor General to undertake the project audit alongside other 
projects implemented through country systems. Given the high-country risks, specific attention will be 
focused on the International Standards on Auditing (ISA 800) - Auditor’s Report on Special Purpose Audit 
Engagements as necessary. The audited project annual financial statements, management letters, 
together with any additional information required, will be submitted to the World Bank within six months 
after the end of the financial year. The audits shall be in conformity with the World Bank’s audit 
requirements and in accordance with internationally recognized auditing standards. The FGS Office of 
the Auditor General will express an opinion on the Financial Statements in compliance with International 
Standards for Supreme Audit Institutions, and prepare a Management Letter giving observations and 
comments, and providing recommendations for improvements in accounting records, systems, controls, 
and compliance with financial covenants in the financing agreement.  
 
D. Procurement 
 
79. Procurement for the AF will be carried out in accordance with the requirements in the Procurement 
Regulations for Borrowers under Investment Project Financing (IPF): Goods, Works, Non-Consulting 
Services and Consulting Services dated July 1, 2016 (revised November 2017, August 2018 and November 
2020).  
 
80. Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) and Procurement Plan (PP). The Project PPSD 
and the PP will be updated to reflect the additional procurable activities. The updated PPSD will focus on 
key additional procurement activities to select optimum fit for purpose selection methods and market 
 
11 As shall be issued and adopted to replace the EAFS Manual, the COPAMs developed with the support of the project.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 84 
 
approaches and PP for the first 18 months and will include a summary on procurement risk, mitigation, 
action plan and procurement implementation support and supervision plan of the additional 
procurement activities. The updating of the PPSD for AF has been deferred to the implementation stage 
in accordance with paragraph A.3 in Section III of the World Bank Guidance: “Procurement in Situations 
of Urgent need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints.” 
 
81. Procurement implementation arrangement: The existing implementation arrangement of the parent 
project will be maintained and strengthened under the proposed AF. The PIU is already staffed with a 
Procurement Specialist among other staff. The same PIU will be responsible for the implementation of 
the procurement activities. The procurement function of the parent project is led by a procurement 
specialist whose performance has been satisfactory. However, the PIU lacks adequate experience in using 
World Bank Procurement Regulations. To mitigate the risk, the capacity of the existing staff will continue 
to be strengthened under the AF.    
 
82. Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP): The WBG’s STEP system will continue to be 
used under the AF to prepare, clear and update PPs and conduct all procurement transactions for the 
project. Staff of the PIU have been trained in the use of STEP. 
 
E. Legal Operational Policies 
  
 . 
 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
Yes 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 
No 
.
 
83. It may be noted that the International Waterways Policy OP 7.50 was triggered already under the 
parent project. Since the activities under the AF constitute a scaling up and expansion of scope of 
interventions funded under the parent project, all activities proposed under the AF fall under this 
exception to the riparian notification requirement. The exception to the notification requirement for the 
parent project was approved by the Regional Vice President (AFEVP) on March 25, 2020. 
 
F. Environmental and Social 
 
84. While good progress has been made in the development and operationalization of environment and 
social risk management instruments prepared under the parent Project, the Environmental and Social 
Standards (ESS) performance rating is assessed as Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU). The project is 
therefore paying close attention to mitigation measures being taken to remedy areas of non-compliance 
identified under the Desert Locust and Control (DLC) activities touching on ESS 2 (Labor and Working 
Conditions) and ESS 4 (Community Health and Safety).  
 
85. These remedial actions are guided by a FAO-PIU Action Plan (synthesized in Annex 5) and developed on 
March 16, 2021 and currently under implementation by the PIU with support from FAO. The Plan sets 
out key action items and the status of their progress. This is a comprehensive monitoring plan to 
systematically monitor the Action Plan commitments with a status update of April 24, 2021 indicating 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 84 
 
that the PIU with FAO’s support on track with the implementation of the agreed action items. 
 
86. As a next step and agreed requirement, the PIU contracted an independent verification agency (IVA). The 
IVA will be tasked to travel to FAO’s DLC field sites in Puntland to independently verify the specified 
indicators noted in the Monitoring Plan with findings expected in the next update due in June. 
 
87. Under the AF the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for the Parent 
Project will be updated to cover for activities under the AF. Through a rapid environmental and social 
(E&S) assessment, the Project will identify additional potential E&S risks and impacts and reflect the 
appropriate mitigation measures in the updated ESMF. Likewise, any new risks and impacts associated 
with labor, security and Gender-based Violence (GBV) will be identified and reflected in updated Labor 
Management Plan (LMP), Security Management Plan and GBV Response Plan as required. In addition, 
the project will conduct additional stakeholder consultations focused on activities under the AF and the 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) updated accordingly. These updates will be finalized within three 
months of project effectiveness and prior to the commencement of associated activities. These material 
measures and timelines are reflected in the Project Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).   
 
V. WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS 
 
88. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank supported 
project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the World 
Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly 
reviewed in order to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may 
submit their complaint to the World Bank’s independent Inspection Panel which determines whether 
harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of World Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures. 
Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank's 
attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond.  For information on how to 
submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate Grievance Redress Service (GRS), please visit 
http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-service. 
For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit 
www.inspectionpanel.org 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 84 
 
      
 
VI    SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES 
 
 
Changed 
Not Changed 
Results Framework 
  ✔ 
   
Components and Cost 
  ✔ 
   
Loan Closing Date(s) 
  ✔ 
   
Reallocation between Disbursement Categories 
  ✔ 
   
Implementing Agency 
     
✔ 
Project's Development Objectives 
     
✔ 
Cancellations Proposed 
     
✔ 
Disbursements Arrangements 
     
✔ 
Legal Covenants 
     
✔ 
Institutional Arrangements 
     
✔ 
Financial Management 
     
✔ 
Procurement 
     
✔ 
 
 
VII   DETAILED CHANGE(S) 
   
COMPONENTS 
Current Component Name 
Current Cost 
(US$, millions) 
Action 
Proposed Component 
Name 
Proposed Cost (US$, 
millions) 
Component 1: Immediate 
Basic Services and 
Livelihood Support 
30.00 No Change 
Component 1:
 
Immediate Basic 
Services and Livelihood 
Support 
30.00 
Component 2: Medium-
Term Flood Recovery 
42.00 No Change 
Component 2:
 
Medium-Term 
Flood Recovery 
42.00 
Component 3: Longer-
Term Disaster Risk 
Preparedness 
39.00 No Change 
Component 3: Longer-
Term Disaster Risk 
Preparedness 
39.00 
Component 4: Project 
6.00 Revised 
Component 4: Project 
11.00 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 84 
 
Management 
Management 
Component 5: Contingent 
Emergency Response 
20.50  
Component 5:
 
Contingent 
Emergency Response 
20.50 
 
0.00 New 
Component 6: 
Anticipatory and 
Recovery Support for 
Addressing Food 
Insecurity 
45.00 
TOTAL 
 137.50  
 
 187.50 
 
 
LOAN CLOSING DATE(S) 
Ln/Cr/Tf 
Status 
Original Closing 
 
Current 
Closing(s)  
 
Proposed  
Closing  
 
Proposed Deadline 
for Withdrawal 
Applications 
IDA-D6300 
Effective 
31-May-2024 
31-May-2024 
31-May-2025 
30-Sep-2025 
   
REALLOCATION BETWEEN DISBURSEMENT CATEGORIES 
Current Allocation 
Actuals + Committed 
Proposed Allocation 
Financing % 
(Type Total) 
 
 
 
Current 
Proposed 
 REALLOCATION NEW 
 
IDA-D6300-001    |    Currency: XDR 
 
iLap Category Sequence No: 1 
Current Expenditure Category: GD,WK,NCS,CS,OC,WS&TR-Comp1&2 
52,800,000.00 
 0.00 
52,800,000.00 
100.00 
100.00 
 
iLap Category Sequence No: 2 
Current Expenditure Category: GD,WK,NCS,CS,OC,WS&TR-C3&4-Ex3g&3h 
20,500,000.00 
 0.00 
16,000,000.00 
100.00 
100.00 
 
iLap Category Sequence No: 3 
Current Expenditure Category: GD,WK,NCS,CS for Sub Act-Comp3g&3h 
12,500,000.00 
 0.00 
12,500,000.00 
100.00 
100.00 
 
iLap Category Sequence No: 4 
Current Expenditure Category: GD, NCS, CS IOC, Workshops and Training 
for Component 4 
15,000,000.00 
 0.00 
4,500,000.00 
100.00 
100.00 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 of 84 
 
iLap Category Sequence No:  
Current Expenditure Category: Emergency Expenditures (CERC) 
 0.00 
 0.00 
15,000,000.00 
 
100.00 
 
iLap Category Sequence No:  
Current Expenditure Category: GD, WK, NCS, CS, IOC and Training for 
Component 6(a) 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 
100.00 
 
iLap Category Sequence No:  
Current Expenditure Category: GD, WK, NCS, CS, IOC and Training for 
Component 6(b) 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 0.00 
 
100.00 
Total 
100,800,000.00
 0.00 
100,800,000.00 
 
 
 
 Expected Disbursements (in US$) 
 DISBURSTBL 
Fiscal Year 
Annual 
Cumulative 
2020 
10,400,000.00 
10,400,000.00 
2021 
30,000,000.00 
40,400,000.00 
2022 
52,300,000.00 
92,700,000.00 
2023 
43,900,000.00 
136,600,000.00 
2024 
36,600,000.00 
173,200,000.00 
2025 
14,400,000.00 
187,600,000.00 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
Risk Category 
Latest ISR Rating 
Current Rating 
 
Political and Governance 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
Macroeconomic 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ Moderate 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and 
Sustainability 
⚫ Moderate 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Fiduciary 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 of 84 
 
Environment and Social 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
Stakeholders 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
Other 
⚫ Moderate 
⚫ High 
 
Overall 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
   LEGAL COVENANTS2 
LEGAL COVENANTS – Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
Sections and Description 
 
 
Under Section I (C) of the Financing Agreement: By no later than two (2) months after the Effective Date, the 
Recipient shall update the Project Operations Manual (POM) in a manner and substance satisfactory to the 
Association, and shall thereafter implement the Project, and cause the Federal Member States (FMS) to carry out 
their respective responsibilities under the Project. 
 
Under Section I (E) of the Financing Agreement: The Recipient shall, not later than 2 months after the Effective 
Date: (a) select and engage an independent verifier to verify and prepare a report confirming the completion of 
actions the Recipient has undertaken and reported on to address environmental and social compliance issues 
related to the Original Project in a manner satisfactory to the Association; and (b) provide the said report to the 
Association. 
 
Under Section I (G) of the Financing Agreement: The Recipient shall ensure that not later than six (6) months after 
the Effective Date, a Preparedness Plan is prepared and adopted in form and substance acceptable to the 
Association. 
 
Under Section I (A) of the Financing Agreement: The Recipient shall maintain for at least one (1) year of the Project 
implementation, the project management services of UNOPS, under terms of reference acceptable to the 
Association, to assist the PIU with the day-to-day implementation of the Project. 
 
 
 
Conditions 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Disbursement 
 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section III Part A in the 
Financing Agreement, no withdrawal shall be made under 
Category (6) and Category (7) until and unless the 
Recipient has updated, adopted and published the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF). 
 
 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 of 84 
 
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING 
 
      
 
Results Framework 
COUNTRY: Somalia  
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project 
RESULT NO PDO 
Project Development Objective(s) 
 
To support the recovery of livelihoods and infrastructure in flood and drought affected areas and strengthen capacity for disaster preparedness nationwide 
 
Project Development Objective Indicators by Objectives/ Outcomes 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
 
Early and integrated recovery from the immediate floods and drought shocks  
Number of people with improved access to livelihoods support 
(Text)  
0.00 
1,240,650 - 1,771,750 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of female-headed households benefiting from livelihood 
inputs (Text)  
0.00 
146,300 - 209,000 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of women benefiting from cash-for-work and 
conditional transfers (Text)  
0.00 
221,667 - 316,667 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 38 of 84 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of female-headed farming households benefiting 
from agricultural inputs (Text)  
0.00 
66,500 - 109,250 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Medium-term rehabilitation of flood damaged infrastructure and services  
Number of households with access to improved infrastructure 
and basic services (Text)  
0.00 
1,721,242 - 2,458,917 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of female-headed households with access to 
improved infrastructure and basic service (Text)  
0.00 
860,621 - 1,229,458 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Longer-term integrated solutions for flood risk management  
Improved national disaster preparedness and response 
mechanisms (Text)  
No 
Yes 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of people benefiting from improved flood risk 
management (Text)  
0.00 
525,000 - 750,000 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Anticipatory and Recovery Support for Addressing Food Insecurity (Action: This Objective is New) 
Number of people benefiting from multiple-use water services 
through periods of drought for domestic, livestock and 
0.00 
116,375 - 166,250 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 39 of 84 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
 
agricultural use (Text)  
Action: This indicator is New  
Rationale:  
Water services that include - zero-emission standpipes or shallow wells with hand or solar pumps and watering troughs for 
livestock. Each type of use – domestic, livestock and agriculture – to be computed with a composite index. 
 
PDO Table SPACE 
 
Intermediate Results Indicators by Components 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
 
Immediate basic services and livelihood support  
Integrated Locust control services (Text)  
0.00 
48,188 - 68,841 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of farming households benefiting from livelihood inputs 
(Text)  
0.00 
11,083 - 15,833 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of female-headed households benefiting from 
livelihood inputs (Text)  
0.00 
5,542 - 7,917 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of persons benefiting from cash-for-work and 
conditional cash transfers (Text)  
0.00 
443,333 - 633,333 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 40 of 84 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of women benefiting from cash-for-work and 
conditional transfers (Text)  
0.00 
221,667 - 316,667 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of farming households benefiting from agricultural 
inputs (Text)  
0.00 
133,000 - 190,000 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of female-headed farming households benefiting 
from agricultural inputs (Text)  
0.00 
66,500 - 95,000 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of livestock treated or prevented from vector-borne 
diseases (Text)  
0.00 
110,833 - 158,333 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of persons benefiting from healthcare services (Text)  
0.00 
8,867 - 12,667 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of women benefiting from healthcare services (Text)  
0.00 
4,433 - 6,333 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Percentage of Gender-based Violence (GBV) survivors in 
targeted communities who receive GBV case management 
support in line with international standards (Text)  
0.00 
56 - 80 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 41 of 84 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Citizen Engagement  
Beneficiaries that report that their communities were consulted 
and their project-related grievances were addressed 
(Percentage)  
0.00 
75.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Medium-term flood recovery  
KMs of roads rehabilitated (Text)  
0.00 
65 - 93 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of households with restored access to WASH services 
(Text)  
0.00 
6,207 - 8,867 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of female-headed households with restored access to 
WASH services (Text)  
0.00 
3,103 - 4,433 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Proportion of households with access to improved sanitation 
services (NPD-9 indicator linked to SDG 6) (Text)  
0.00 
Actual 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Length (km) of rehabilitated river channels (Text)  
0.00 
20 - 34 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 42 of 84 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of irrigation schemes rehabilitated (Text)  
0.00 
14 - 20 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of health facilitaties restored (Text)  
0.00 
7 - 10 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Project Management  
Number of initiatives/projects identified by females that been 
addressed by the project (Text)  
0.00 
0.40 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Number of key decision-making committees/groups that include 
at least 30% of women representation (Text)  
0.00 
0.30 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Percentage of females benefited from the referral pathway 
(Text)  
0.00 
0.70 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Contingent Emergency Response (Action: This Component has been Revised) 
Percentage of persons appropriately diagnosed, treated and 
supported (Text)  
0.00 
53% - 75% 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 43 of 84 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
 
Anticipatory and Recovery Support for Addressing Food Insecurity (Action: This Component is New) 
Number of persons with restored access to water supply (Text)  
0.00 
232,750 - 332,500 
Action: This indicator is New  
Number of households benefiting from agricultural inputs (Text)  
0.00 
19,950 - 28,500 
Action: This indicator is New  
Number of female-headed households benefiting from 
agricultural inputs (Text)  
0.00 
9,975 - 14,250 
Action: This indicator is New  
Number of households benefiting from fishing input (Text)  
0.00 
16,625 - 23,750 
Action: This indicator is New  
Number of persons benefiting from rehabilitated coastal 
community (Text)  
0.00 
49,875 - 71,250 
Action: This indicator is New  
Number of females benefiting from rehabilitated fisheries 
infrastructure (Text)  
0.00 
19,950 - 28,500 
Action: This indicator is New  
 
IO Table SPACE 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to the Somalia Crisis Recovery Project (P176343) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 44 of 84 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators Mapped 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Number of people with improved access 
to livelihoods support 
Persons  - benefiting from 
livelihood support; 
engaged in cash-for-work 
and unconditional cash 
grants; supported with 
agricultural inputs; 
obtained water and health 
services; and fishing inputs 
Bi-annual 
 
Progress 
Report 
 
Aggregate 
 
PIU 
 
Number of female-headed households 
benefiting from livelihood inputs 
Women or female-headed 
households - benefiting 
from livelihood support; 
engaged in cash-for-work 
and conditional cash 
grants; supported with 
agricultural inputs; 
obtained water and health 
services; fishing inputs 
Bi-annual 
 
Progress 
Report 
 
Aggregate 
 
PIU 
 
Number of women benefiting from 
cash-for-work and conditional 
transfers 
 
Bi-annual 
 
Progress 
Report 
 
Aggregate 
 
PIU 
 
Number of female-headed farming 
households benefiting from 
agricultural inputs 
Provision of seed packages, 
livestock feed-stocks and 
cash-for-work, and "Inputs 
for Assets" 
Bi-annual 
 
Progress 
Report 
 
Aggregate 
 
PIU 
