Document of 
The World Bank 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD4513 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
PROJECT PAPER 
ON A  
PROPOSED ADDITIONAL GRANT 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 76.7 MILLION 
(US$110 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
TO THE 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
FOR THE 
SHOCK RESPONSIVE SAFETY NET FOR HUMAN CAPITAL PROJECT 
June 4, 2021 
Social Protection and Jobs Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective May 31, 2021) 
 
Currency Unit  =   Somali Shilling (SOS) 
SOS 578.50 = US$1 
US$1.44  = SDR 1 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Hafez M. H. Ghanem 
Country Director: Keith E. Hansen 
Regional Director: Amit Dar 
Practice Manager: Paolo Belli 
Task Team Leaders: Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi, Nadia Selim 
  
 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
 
AF 
Additional Financing 
AfDB 
African Development Bank 
COVID-19 
Coronavirus Disease 2019 
DA 
Designated Account 
E&S 
Environmental and Social  
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section  
EU 
European Union 
FCDO 
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office 
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FHWs 
Female Health Workers 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMIS 
Financial Management Information System  
FMS 
Federal Member States  
GBV 
Gender-Based Violence 
GRM 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service 
IDPs 
Internally Displaced Persons 
IPC 
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MEB 
Minimum Expenditure Basket 
MIS 
Management Information System 
MoLSA 
Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs  
MSMEs 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
NDP 9 
Ninth National Development Plan 
NEC 
National Economic Council 
NGO 
Non-governmental Organization 
ODA 
Official Development Assistance  
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PP 
Procurement Plan 
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development  
SCoA 
Standard Chart of Accounts  
SEA 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
SEP 
Stakeholders Engagement Plan 
SMP 
Staff-Monitored Program 
SNHCP 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project 
SOEs 
Statement of Expenditures 
SP 
Social Protection  
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement  
TA 
Technical Assistance  
TPM 
Third-Party Monitoring 
UN 
United Nations 
UNICEF 
United Nations Children’s Fund  
WBG 
World Bank Group 
WFP 
World Food Programme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
    
I. 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING ........................................................... 8 
A. 
Introduction......................................................................................................................................... 8 
B. 
Country Context .................................................................................................................................. 8 
C. 
Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................... 10 
D. 
Parent Project Status and Results .................................................................................................... 12 
E. 
Rationale and Justification for Additional Financing ....................................................................... 13 
F. 
Relevance to Higher Level Objectives .............................................................................................. 15 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING ...................................................................................... 16 
A. 
Overview of the Additional Financing .............................................................................................. 16 
B. 
Project Development Objectives and Beneficiaries ......................................................................... 16 
C. 
Key Indicators and Results ................................................................................................................ 17 
D. 
Project Components and Activities .................................................................................................. 17 
E. 
Climate Co-Benefits ........................................................................................................................... 18 
F. 
Gender ............................................................................................................................................... 19 
G. 
Citizen Engagement ........................................................................................................................... 20 
H. 
Implementation and Partnerships .................................................................................................... 20 
I. 
Project Closing Date .......................................................................................................................... 21 
J. 
Budget and Financing ........................................................................................................................ 21 
III. KEY RISKS ....................................................................................................................................... 21 
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................................................... 25 
A. 
Economic and Financial Analysis ...................................................................................................... 25 
B. 
Technical Analysis ............................................................................................................................. 26 
C. 
Financial Management...................................................................................................................... 28 
D. 
Procurement ...................................................................................................................................... 30 
E. 
Legal Operational Policies ................................................................................................................. 30 
F. 
Environmental and Social ................................................................................................................. 31 
V. 
WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS ................................................................................................ 32 
VI    SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES ........................................................................................................ 33 
VII   DETAILED CHANGE(S)....................................................................................................................... 33 
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ...................................................................................... 36 
ANNEX 1:  World Bank Group (WBG) COVID-19 Country Program Response Note - Somalia .............. 42 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 49  
 
 
 
      
BASIC INFORMATION – PARENT (Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project - P171346) 
 
 
Country 
Product Line 
Team Leader(s) 
Somalia 
IBRD/IDA 
Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Resp CC 
Req CC 
Practice Area (Lead) 
P171346 
Investment Project 
Financing 
HAES2 (10211) AECE2 (6542) 
Social Protection & Jobs 
  
Implementing Agency: Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs 
 ADD FIN TBL1 
Is this a regionally tagged 
project? 
 
No 
 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
 
No 
 
Approval Date 
Closing Date 
Expected 
Guarantee 
Expiration Date 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
08-Aug-2019 
31-Aug-2022  
Substantial 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Parent 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach [MPA] 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[  ] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[✓] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
 
Development Objective(s) 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 49  
 
 
The project development objective is to provide cash transfers to targeted poor and vulnerable households and 
establish the key building blocks of a national shock-responsive safety net system. 
 
Ratings (from Parent ISR) 
 
RATING_DRAFT_NO 
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation 
Latest ISR 
 
22-Nov-2019 
18-Jun-2020 
22-Dec-2020 
Progress towards achievement 
of PDO 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Overall Implementation 
Progress (IP) 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Overall ESS Performance 
MU 
 
MU 
 
MS 
 
Overall Risk 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Financial Management 
S 
 
S 
 
MS 
 
Project Management 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Procurement 
S 
 
S 
 
MS 
 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project 
Additional Financing - P176368) 
 
ADDFIN_TABLE 
Project ID 
Project Name 
Additional Financing Type 
Urgent Need or Capacity 
Constraints 
P176368 
Shock Responsive Safety 
Net for Human Capital 
Project Additional 
Financing 
Restructuring 
Yes 
Financing instrument 
Product line 
Approval Date 
Investment Project 
Financing 
IBRD/IDA 
17-Jun-2021 
Projected Date of Full 
Disbursement 
Bank/IFC Collaboration   
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 49  
 
 
31-Dec-2023 
No 
 
 
Is this a regionally tagged project? 
 
No 
 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Child 
 
 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[  ] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[✓] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
 
 Disbursement Summary (from Parent ISR) 
 
Source of Funds 
Net  
Commitments 
Total Disbursed 
Remaining Balance 
Disbursed 
IBRD 
 
 
 
  
 
 % 
IDA 
  65.00 
  51.23 
  14.94 
    
 
77 % 
Grants 
 
 
 
  
 
 % 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project 
Additional Financing - P176368) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
SUMMARY (Total Financing) 
 
Current Financing 
Proposed Additional 
Financing 
Total Proposed 
Financing 
Total Project Cost 
65.00 
110.00 
175.00 
Total Financing 
65.00 
110.00 
175.00 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 49  
 
 
of which IBRD/IDA  
65.00 
110.00 
175.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILSNewFinEnh1- Additional Financing 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
110.00 
          IDA Grant 
110.00 
 
   
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Guarantee Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
0.00 
 110.00 
   0.00 
 110.00 
National PBA 
0.00 
 110.00 
   0.00 
 110.00 
Total 
0.00 
110.00 
   0.00 
110.00 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
Does the project require any other Policy waiver(s)? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 49  
 
 
 
ESStandards 
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Not Currently Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Not Currently Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Not Currently Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
ESStandardsNote 
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Social Protection & Jobs 
 
Contributing Practice Areas 
 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 49  
 
 
PROJECT TEAM 
 
Bank Staff 
Name 
Role 
Specialization 
Unit 
Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi 
Team Leader (ADM 
Responsible) 
 
HAES2 
Nadia Selim 
Team Leader 
 
HAES2 
Francis Akolu Muthuiya 
Procurement Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
 
EAERU 
Leonard Mutuku Matheka 
Financial Management 
Specialist (ADM Responsible) 
 
EAEG1 
Nyabicha Omurwa Onang'o Financial Management 
Specialist 
 
EAEG1 
Raymond Simon Maina 
Kirwa 
Social Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
 
SAES2 
Tracy Hart 
Environmental Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
 
SENDR 
Adrian Howard Cutler 
Social Specialist 
 
SAES2 
Denis Nikitin 
Team Member 
 
HMNSP 
Dilip Kumar Prusty Chinari 
Team Member 
 
WFACS 
Haroub Ahmed Haroub 
Environmental Specialist 
 
SAEE2 
Jean O Owino 
Team Member 
 
WFACS 
Khalid Ahmed Ali 
Moheyddeen 
Team Member 
 
HMNSP 
Mariam Denise Brain 
Team Member 
 
HAES1 
Martin M. Serrano 
Counsel 
 
LEGAM 
Matuna Mushfeqa Mostafa 
Team Member 
 
HMNSP 
Peggy Ayako Kwendo 
Team Member 
 
AEMSO 
Simon Narbeth 
Team Member 
 
HAES1 
Sonia Plaza 
Team Member 
 
EAEF1 
Tewodros Tebekew 
Admassu 
Team Member 
 
SAWW1 
Thilasoni Benjamin 
Musuku 
Team Member 
 
EAEF1 
Verena Phipps-Ebeler 
Social Specialist 
 
SAES2 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 49  
 
 
Extended Team 
Name 
Title 
Organization 
Location 
   
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 49 
 
I. 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
A. Introduction 
 
1. 
This Project Paper seeks the approval of the World Bank’s Board of Executive Directors to provide an 
additional financing (AF) in the amount of US$110 million equivalent and a Level II Restructuring to the Shock 
Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (SNHCP, P171346, Parent Project). The parent SNHCP was a 
US$65 million grant financed from the International Development Association’s (IDA’s) pre-arrears clearance 
grant facility, and it aimed “to provide cash transfers to targeted poor and vulnerable households and establish 
the key building blocks of a national shock-responsive safety net system.” The project was approved on August 8, 
2019 and became effective on September 17, 2019. The proposed AF will continue the delivery of critically needed 
cash transfers under the parent SNHCP to chronically poor and vulnerable households disproportionately 
impacted by the recent multiple shocks of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, locust outbreak 
and floods, among others. At the same time, it will support efforts to strengthen access by beneficiaries of cash 
assistance to social services, thereby supporting their human capital accumulation. Further, the Parent Project 
will be restructured to update the definitions of relevant indicators to incorporate climate considerations. The 
proposed activities are consistent with the original Project Development Objective (PDO) and are strategically 
aligned with the National Social Protection Policy (2019), the National Development Plan (2020-2024) and the 
World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Somalia for FY19-22 (Report No. 124734-SO).  
 
2. 
The proposed AF is fully compliant with the World Bank policy on ‘Investment Project Financing’ (IPF) 
and the accompanying World Bank procedure for AF. The SNHCP is well-performing, with Implementation Status 
and Results Report ratings for implementation progress and development objectives consistently rated 
Satisfactory over the past 12 months. The project shows full compliance with all legal covenants and there are no 
outstanding audits or overdue reports. The proposed AF is being processed in accordance with the condensed 
procedures outlined in Paragraph 12 Section III of the World Bank IPF Policy, and Paragraph 56 of Section III of the 
IPF Directive: Exceptional Arrangements in Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, given 
the country context characterized by fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) and low institutional capacity. 
 
B. Country Context 
 
3. 
After decades of conflict and insecurity, Somalia is gradually establishing the foundations for stability 
and a new political settlement, although uncertainties persist, and progress remains uneven. Following decades 
of conflict, insecurity and instability, Somalia entered a new phase of relative peace and stability in 2011 with the 
Agreement on the Provisional Constitution. The Federal Republic of Somalia was established in 2012, bringing to 
power the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and ending a long period of revolving transitional governments. 
The federal system of governance with Federal Member States (FMS) has opened a new chapter for Somalia’s 
development, offering hope for a stable future. However, the federation process is complex, with significant 
development opportunities but also persisting uncertainties over representation, and power and resource 
sharing. The recent challenging political dynamics around arrangements for the general elections of 2021 have 
strained the relationship between the FGS and FMS. Meanwhile, the nature of Somaliland’s relationship with 
Somalia remains unresolved. Further, insecurity remains a concern, while competition for natural resources and 
poor living conditions fuel fighting in rural areas, exacerbated by the recent shocks. As such, government control 
beyond urban areas and key towns and cities continues to be limited.   
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 49 
 
4. 
In recent years, Somalia’s economy has been adversely impacted by triple crises of floods, locust 
infestation and the global COVID-19 pandemic. These concurrent crises have caused an economic contraction of 
1.5 per cent in 2020, from an earlier projected growth rate of 3.2 percent. As a result, economic growth and per 
capita income gains made since 2017 (particularly gains made among lower income groups) have largely been lost 
in a period where the economy was still recovering from the 2017 drought.1 The slower pace of growth in 2019 
and contraction in 2020 have pushed more people into poverty, such that the international poverty estimate 
(measured using the US$1.90/person/day poverty line) was 71 percent in 2020, two percentage points higher 
than 2017. The economy is showing some signs of recovery, with growth projected at around 2.9 percent in 2021,2 
supported mainly by the ongoing flow of remittances and official development assistance (ODA). However, 
prolonged political challenges may have implications for external grant financing and broader stability.  
 
5. 
Somalia is also highly vulnerable to climate-induced natural disasters, namely repeated cycles of 
droughts and floods driven by climate change, resulting in a protracted humanitarian crisis and high levels of 
food insecurity. Since 1960, Somalia has experienced 14 droughts, averaging one every four years. The 2011 East 
Africa Drought resulted in the deaths of a quarter million people, half of them children under the age of five years, 
and displaced nearly one million people,3 while the 2016/17 drought left an estimated 6.7 million people in urgent 
need of humanitarian assistance. Between 2018 and 2020, Somalia has also experienced major flooding, which 
displaced some 650,000 people in 2020 alone. As a consequence of conflict and climate related disasters, nearly 
three million people were internally displaced as of October 2020,4 in addition to an existing estimated caseload 
of 1.1 million people in protracted displacement.5  Current projections of food insecurity for the period April-June 
2021 estimate that  2.7 million people across Somalia to face high levels of acute food insecurity (IPC6 3+) in the 
absence of humanitarian assistance. An additional 2.5 million people are facing “Stressed” (IPC 2) levels of food 
insecurity and are in need of livelihood/income support to protect them from falling into IPC 3+ phases. Moreover, 
approximately 840,000 children under the age of five years are likely to be acutely malnourished, including nearly 
143,000 who are likely to be severely malnourished.7 The Center for Global Development therefore ranked 
Somalia in 2018 as the most vulnerable country to climate change among 167 countries, adjusted for coping 
capacity.8 
 
6. 
The recent outbreak of desert locusts in Somalia further risks worsening the humanitarian crisis and 
food insecurity. Small clusters of desert locusts were first detected in December 2019 in northern parts of Somalia. 
By February 2020, the FGS declared a state of emergency after confirmation of the worst desert locust outbreak 
in 25 years. Initially, forty-five districts in Somalia were affected by the locust infestation by January 2020. 
However, continued breeding by the desert locusts resulted in an upsurge of outbreak in Somalia, such that 64 
districts thus far have been affected, posing an extremely high risk to rural livelihoods across Somalia in 2021, 
deepening vulnerabilities of affected households. The broad impact of the desert locust infestation across 
different livelihood zones has meant reduced access to food, loss of income, resource-based conflict, increased 
 
1 Federal Government of Somalia. 2021. “Somalia Socio-Economic Impact Assessment (SEIA) of COVID-19.” Mogadishu, Somalia. 
2 See http://macropovertyoutlook.worldbank.org/mpo_files/mpo/mpo-sm21-som-scope.pdf 
3 World Bank. 2018. Country Partnership Framework for the Federal Republic of Somalia. Washington, DC: World Bank 
4 See https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2020/10/01/reengaging-with-somalia-for-long-lasting-development-outcomes 
5 See https://data2.unhcr.org/en/situations/cccm_somalia.  
6 The Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) is a set of tools and procedures to classify the severity of food insecurity using a 
widely accepted five-phase scale: IPC Phase 1=Minimal; Phase 2=Stressed; Phase 3=Crisis; Phase 4=Emergency; and Phase 5=Famine at the 
area level (Phase 5=Catastrophe at the household group level). 
7 See http://www.ipcinfo.org/ipcinfo-website/alerts-archive/issue-32/en/#:~:text=Overview,Crisis%20(IPC%20Phase%203). 
8 See https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/554051534791806400/pdf/SOMALIA-SCD-08152018.pdf 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 49 
 
debt levels, and limited migration options. With caloric intake that is already inadequate, higher food prices due 
to the multiple shocks of COVID-19, desert locust and floods have pushed poor households towards less nutritious 
foods. Such negative coping mechanisms will result in adverse long-term effects, deepening the challenge of 
breaking the intergenerational cycle of poverty.  
 
7. 
The already critical vulnerability context has been compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-
19 pandemic has further exacerbated household welfare, with nearly 80 percent of households reporting some 
reduction in income from wages. As Somalia relies on food imports to feed its population, the lockdown of key 
supply markets, closure of borders and restrictions on domestic movements negatively affected basic commodity 
prices throughout 2020.9 The economy has contracted by an estimated 1.5 percent in 2020, and reports indicate 
that remittances, received by an estimated 40 percent of Somali households, may have dropped by as much as 50 
percent. In addition, anticipated food shortages and tightening of food markets due to the COVID-19 pandemic is 
amplifying food insecurity and fragility in hard-hit areas, further precipitating population displacement and 
localized conflict. 
 
8. 
The Government’s capacity to respond to the multiple crises is further impacted by the on-going 
political uncertainty. Although Somalia was scheduled to hold elections in early 2021, the constitutional mandate 
of the Federal Government of Somalia ended on February 8, 2021, which included the mandate of the current 
President and the Houses of Parliament (the People’s House and the Senate). The emerging political agreement 
around elections arrangements remains fragile and uncertainties persist concerning their implementation. Amidst 
this evolving context, there is also concerns that militia-based opposition, known today as Al-Shabaab, will 
capitalize on the situation. 
 
C. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
9. 
In 2019, Somalia established its first government-led national safety net program, known as the 
Baxnaano. The Baxnaano is supported by the World Bank through the SNHCP, which is contributing to the 
government’s enhanced capacity to deliver a safety net to the poorest of its citizens. The project is comprised of 
three components, to be implemented over a three-year period. These include: (i) Component 1: Nutrition-linked 
Unconditional Cash Transfers — quarterly payments to be provided initially for a one year period, with 
government to secure budget and donor funding for its continuation beyond the first year; (ii) Component 2: 
Delivery Systems and Institutional Capacity Building — to be developed over the 3-year life of the project; and (iii) 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Management — for the full 
duration of the project. The project reaches 200,000 chronically poor and vulnerable households (approximately 
1.2 million individuals) with children under five years of age in 21 districts across Somalia. The SNHCP is being 
implemented by the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MoLSA) on behalf of the FGS, with World Food 
Programme (WFP) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) supporting the implementation of 
Components 1 and 2, respectively, through Standard Output Agreements signed between each UN agency and 
MoLSA.   
 
10. 
Prior to the establishment of the Baxnaano, Somalis primarily relied on traditional and informal kinship-
based systems. However, these exclude minority clans and the most vulnerable groups as they lack resources. 
Remittances also represent an important component of income for the bottom 40 percent of households, but 
 
9 For example, the March 2020 Consumer Price Index published by the Federal Directorate of National Statistics indicated an increase of 
up to 2.12 percent. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 49 
 
tend to be concentrated within particular clans, lineages, and extended families and have been declining in recent 
months due to the COVID-19 driven economic impacts in origin countries. Moreover, urban households are more 
likely to receive remittances. As such, remittances often do not reach the neediest, who are most likely to fall 
through the cracks of informal safety nets. Marginalized and minority rural groups are also likely to be excluded 
from such benefits because they lack access to resources. 
 
11. 
Consequently, the international community has stepped in to deliver humanitarian aid and short-term 
social and livelihood assistance to those in urgent need, although significant funding gaps remain. Between July 
and December 2020, humanitarian food assistance reached between 1.6 million to 1.9 million people per month 
among the IPC 3 + cases, with focus on internally displaced persons (IDPs). Additionally, a European Union (EU)-
funded urban safety net intervention in Mogadishu implemented by WFP reached some 125,000 people. 
Moreover, the Government’s Baxnaano program, through the SNHCP, supported 440,900 food insecure people in 
rural areas. Of the 2.7 million people projected to face IPC 3+ food insecurity between April and June 2021, 
humanitarian funding committed to date is expected to cover around 1.7 million people (until June 2021), of which 
1.3 million will be reached by WFP. While humanitarian donors have historically stepped up their funding during 
crisis, significant funding gaps remain, especially for the protection of households in IPC 2 phase, currently 
estimated at 2.9 million people in rural areas. As such, although critical in saving lives, humanitarian assistance 
falls short in providing predictable, reliable, and scalable safety nets, which protect poor and vulnerable 
populations over time, address their vulnerabilities, and strengthen their resilience to shocks, contributing to 
medium-term recovery and longer-term development. Further, humanitarian programs do not support 
government-led service delivery systems, which is important for building a social contract between citizens and 
the State.  
 
12. 
In recent years, there has been a growing recognition among international partners on the need to 
support a government-led national safety net program aimed at development outcomes. Consequently, along 
with other donors, the World Bank has been supporting a government-led social protection (SP) sector strategy 
and establishing new oversight and coordination mechanisms to guide SP in Somalia. The national Social 
Protection Policy,10 which provides the policy framework for the Baxnaano, was endorsed in September 2019, and 
the Five-Year Implementation Plan to operationalize the Policy was endorsed in November 2020. Together, these 
provide the strategic agenda and roadmap to realize the Government’s vision for the SP sector. A National Social 
Protection Steering Committee, chaired by the Office of the Prime Minister, and a Government-Donor Social 
Protection Working Group, led by MoLSA, have been established by the Government to provide strategic policy 
guidance and ensure coordination and collaboration of efforts within the SP sector, supported by the SNHCP. 
 
13. 
As a result, the Baxnaano is increasingly gaining visibility as the Government’s national cash transfer 
program, with several development partners exploring potentials for aligning their interventions with its design 
and delivery systems. For example, the EU has recently funded a safety net project which incorporated some 
elements of alignment with the Baxnaano. Some humanitarian agencies are also exploring alignment with the 
shock responsive features of the Baxnaano and the possibility of collaboration on the database of the Unified 
Social Registry (USR), under development with support from SNHCP. Additionally, the United Kingdom Foreign, 
Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) funds multiple humanitarian cash assistance projects. The SNHCP 
has also collaborated with the FCDO to leverage the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) mechanism known as MESH 
that conducts phone-based interviews with beneficiaries of cash assistance programs. This data provides valuable 
 
10 The SP Policy development was led by MoLSA with technical assistance from UNICEF, WFP and the UN Food and Agriculture Organization, 
and funded by the Italian Cooperation. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 49 
 
information, particularly on benefit delivery and use, which supports enhanced implementation processes. A 
Donor Working Group has been established by donors in the SP sector to discuss sector development and strive 
to coordinate their support. In addition, there is a Cash Working Group, which brings together all actors using 
cash-based interventions to coordinate their activities. The role of the Government in these initiatives is being 
further identified and supported, under the recently established Government-Donor Social Protection Working 
Group. 
 
14. 
Beyond the SNHCP, the World Bank is also supporting the FGS to operationalize the shock responsive 
features of the Baxnaano and respond to the locust crisis through the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Locust 
Response Project (SNLRP, P174065). The SNLRP, an ongoing US$40 million equivalent project financed from the 
IDA18 Regional Window, supports the rapid scale up of Baxnaano coverage to poor and vulnerable households 
affected by the desert locust outbreak. Specifically, it responds to the threat of the locust outbreak by protecting 
locust-affected households from falling into deeper food insecurity and by preventing the sale/loss of their 
productive assets through the provision of cash transfers. Support is provided across Somalia, with a primary focus 
on rural districts with severe locust infestation. In doing so, the SNLRP helps to address impacts of a climate-
induced natural disaster that could potentially serve as a driver of fragility by enabling households to mitigate and 
withstand the impact on income and food security throughout its duration. A proposed AF (P176369) is expected 
to be approved by the World Bank’s Board of Executive Directors in June 2021 to scale up the response to the 
unanticipated upsurge of locust outbreak. 
 
D. Parent Project Status and Results 
 
15. 
The SNHCP has achieved significant results and “Progress Towards Achievement of PDO” and the 
“Overall Implementation Progress” were rated Satisfactory in the last 12 months of implementation. Despite 
the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic and complex political dynamics between the FGS, FMS and 
Somaliland, as of April 2021, the SNHCP has registered 156,543 households (nearly 80 percent of the total targeted 
caseload). Of these, 107,737 households have been verified and enrolled, and received all four quarterly 
payments. Geographic targeting was concluded following in-depth consultations with FMS and district authorities, 
which was critical in strengthening FGS/FMS dialogue and in ensuring full ownership and commitment to the 
implementation of the cash transfers, and 880 villages from 21 districts across Somalia have been selected. The 
full caseload of 200,000 households is expected to be reached by June 2021. Development of the USR and the 
cash transfer delivery systems are progressing well. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within MoLSA is fully 
established, with liaison officers at the FMS level. M&E arrangements are also well established with third-party 
monitoring (TPM), as well as a targeting evaluation, which is jointly funded by the Multi-Partner Fund (MPF) and 
the FCDO, underway. Consequently, the ratings for Project Management and M&E are Satisfactory. 
 
16. 
The project financial management (FM) arrangements are deemed to be adequate and no major FM 
issues have been reported. As of May 2021, total disbursement stands at US$50.61 million (77.8 percent) of the 
total IDA grant, of which US$46.85 million has been disbursed to WFP (representing 88 percent of the total funding 
for Component 1), US$2.42 million to UNICEF (representing 40 percent of total funding for Component 2), and 
US$1.32 million to MoLSA (representing 22 percent of the total funding for Component 3). The project spending 
across the components therefore is considered to have progressed reasonably well, including disbursement to the 
UN Agencies. The Unaudited Interim Financial Reports continue to be prepared and submitted to the World Bank 
on time, and the audit for the financial year ending December 2020 is underway. Though the project has started 
submitting Statement of Expenditures (SOEs) for documentation, there is a need to expedite and accelerate the 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 49 
 
submission of the SOEs to be in line with the expenditures. As such, support is being given by the project to ensure 
timely reporting of actual expenditures to avoid significant mismatch between the actual and reported 
expenditures. The FM rating is therefore Moderately Satisfactory.  
 
17. 
The project also continues to perform well on procurement without major issues. The MoLSA PIU has 
been successfully on-boarded with qualified staff capable of undertaking day-to-day project management and 
implementation. Focal points have also been established at the FMS level to support implementation on the 
ground and serve as liaisons between the FMS authorities and MoLSA. The Standard Output Agreements between 
MoLSA and the UN Agencies (WFP and UNICEF) have been signed to enable implementation of components 1 and 
2. A TPM agency has also been successfully on-boarded to support robust M&E of the project. However, while the 
fully established PIU continues to perform satisfactorily from a fiduciary perspective, with its capacities 
increasingly growing due to the hands on support by the World Bank, general weaknesses in the national fiduciary 
system and regulatory environment, coupled with high risks posed by the current political uncertainties and 
COVID-19, present unprecedented challenges and calls for caution. The Procurement rating is therefore 
Moderately Satisfactory.  
 
18. 
The project has been performing well on environmental and social (E&S) safeguards with a functioning 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) that continues to uptake and process complaints and grievances. All social 
risk management plans for the Parent Project have been prepared by MoLSA and cleared for implementation. A 
GRM/Social Risk Management Specialist and a Labor GRM Officer have been recruited by the PIU, with augmented 
capacity from WFP and UNICEF. These include a Social Management Plan (that comprises a Security Management 
Plan and a GBV Action Plan), Stakeholder Engagement Plan, and Labor Management Procedures. No severe 
incident has been reported to date, including GBV and occupational health and safety incidents. The GRM, 
comprising of WFP’s complaint feedback mechanism for cash transfers and a MoLSA’s toll-free call center for labor 
related grievances, is accessible and operational. Moreover, lessons learnt from complaints and grievances 
received are being used to proactively improve management of complaints and grievances. Important progress 
has also been made in addressing keys risks of sexual exploitation and abuse, sexual harassment and other forms 
of GBV, including periodic training of project staff, identification of GBV services providers in project areas and 
articulation of approaches for providing care for survivors in areas where services are not available. Specifically, 
community health workers will be trained on the GBV Pocket Guide to enable care for survivors in the absence of 
formal services. Nonetheless, the social risks remain high with limited capacity to respond to them. The E&S rating 
is therefore Moderately Satisfactory.  
 
19. 
The project has developed a COVID-19 adaptation plan that outlines the adaptation measures 
undertaken by the implementing agencies to mitigate the risks of contagion due to project activities. The plan 
is guided by the protocols developed by FGS and the UN agencies, particularly the World Health Organization. 
While COVID-19 impacted the pace of implementation, especially the registration of beneficiaries, measures such 
as the use of mobile payments; provision of personal protective equipment to project workers; and enforcement 
of relevant risk prevention guidance, such as social distancing during community events, use of virtual platforms 
for training and meetings etc. have mitigated the risk of contagion due to project activities and enabled continued 
smooth implementation. 
 
E. Rationale and Justification for Additional Financing 
 
20. 
The proposed AF to the SNHCP will support the continuation of the cash transfers to existing beneficiary 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 49 
 
households beyond the 12 months of coverage financed by the Parent Project. The broad aim of the SNCHP is 
to help the FGS develop, establish, and deliver a long-term safety net program that provides sustained and 
predictable income assistance to the poor and vulnerable population, strengthens resilience to climate shocks, 
and contributes to building their human capital. By doing so, the AF is expected to also contribute to building trust 
and confidence in the government by its citizens. According to the current Baxnaano design,11 beneficiaries are 
entitled to cash assistance for three years before they are reassessed for eligibility for re-enrollment. At the 
appraisal of the parent SNHCP, it was envisioned that upon successful implementation, the Government would 
seek additional funds to ensure the program continuation beyond IDA’s funding for the first year of the cash 
benefits. The current funding under the Parent Project for the cash transfer payments has been fully committed 
by the fourth Quarter payments in March 2021, with fifth quarter payments due in June 2021.  
 
21. 
The FGS is firmly committed to the continuation of the Baxnaano and has requested the proposed AF 
to continue the coverage of the current Baxnaano beneficiaries for Quarter 5 payments onwards. The quarterly 
cash transfers to 200,000 households cost around US$55 million per year, inclusive of the management and 
delivery cost. The funding requirement for the remaining two years of the three-year coverage duration thus is a 
total of US$110 million. With the proposed AF in the amount of US$110 million equivalent, the Baxnaano will be 
able to ensure smooth and uninterrupted delivery of cash to the existing caseload for the remainder of the next 
two years, after which the existing beneficiary households will be reassessed for eligibility for re-enrollment, per 
the program design.  Once the IDA support ends, the Government may still require external funding support to 
continue and expand the Baxnaano, given the country’s limited fiscal space. As such, the FGS will continue to 
explore additional sources of funding to ensure the sustainability of the Baxnaano beyond IDA grant support.  
 
22. 
Predictable and reliable SNHCP cash transfers have played a critical role in protecting household food 
security and livelihood, promoting human capital, and strengthening resilience against climate and other 
shocks. At times of crisis, vulnerable households adopt negative coping mechanisms; for example, they eat next 
season's seed, eat less nutritious food, sell off productive assets, withdraw children from school etc., to meet 
short-term needs. Such negative coping mechanisms result in adverse long-term effects, deepening the challenges 
of breaking the intergenerational cycle of poverty. A beneficiary survey undertaken after the first quarter payment 
found that, at the time of the survey, the Baxnaano was the only cash support received in the previous two months 
by 96 percent of the respondents, with 98.8 percent having spent ‘most or all’ money on food. This demonstrates 
that SNHCP cash transfers are reaching households underserved by social assistance and are having an immediate 
impact on food insecurity. 
 
23. 
Continued support will contribute to efforts aimed at addressing extreme poverty, food insecurity, and 
vulnerability in Somalia, driven by the recent multiple shocks of COVID-19 and climate-induced floods and 
locust infestation. Poverty and food insecurity are rising in Somalia due to the triple crises of COVID-19, floods, 
and locust infestation, and will result in worsening development outcomes, if not protected. Higher poverty rates 
are worrisome given the low base from which Somalia is starting, being already the third poorest country in the 
region. Increasing food insecurity, particularly those in the “Stressed” category, is of particular concern, as the 
chronic poor could fall into worse levels of food insecurity requiring humanitarian assistance if not protected. This 
will result in further financial burden on the humanitarian system, which is already struggling to respond to 
growing needs in the country amidst significant decrease in international aid in recent months due to deteriorating 
 
11 The coverage duration during the appraisal of the Parent Project was not determined. However, as MoLSA is advancing in establishing 
the design parameters of the Baxnaano, a policy decision was made during SNHCP implementation to provide beneficiary entitlements for 
up to three years. The FGS is therefore now seeking additional funds to cover the funding needs for the remaining two years of entitlements.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 49 
 
economic conditions and growing domestic priorities among the donor countries. Worsening acute malnutrition 
is also a concern given its impact on human capital accumulation of poor and vulnerable households. As such, it is 
imperative to ensure continued reliable and predictable cash assistance to the chronically poor and vulnerable 
households to protect against the combined shocks and vulnerabilities, which have impacted negatively on access 
to livelihoods and income generating activities across Somalia and have placed additional pressures on households 
trying to meet basic needs. 
 
24. 
Continued government-led cash assistance will also be critical in the coming months to support citizen 
confidence in institutions given the recent political uncertainties. Uninterrupted smooth delivery of cash 
transfers to the poorest and most vulnerable segment of the Somali society will signal the Government’s 
continued commitment to improving the lives of its people. This will particularly be critical in maintain the sanctity 
of the fragile social contract between the government and its citizens given the recent political uncertainties. The 
partnership with WFP for the delivery of cash transfers directly to beneficiaries provides an important mitigation 
measure against any potential political interference and/or security risks in such fragile political and security 
context.   
 
25. 
The proposed AF will help to preserve the gains made by the SNHCP. Interruptions in the delivery of the 
cash transfers risk losing the potential welfare and human capital gains made to date and pushing the current 
SNHCP beneficiary households into worse levels of food insecurity given the on-going impacts of the multiple 
shocks and vulnerabilities. It also risks the reputation of the Baxnaano, the first ever government-led national cash 
transfer program, as well as the trust in government institutions. 
 
F. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
 
26. 
Social protection continues to be an important part of the FGS strategy to fight poverty and promote 
resilience, including against climate and other shocks. The Provisional Constitution of Somalia (2011) provides 
for the rights of all persons to access economic and social rights, including SP and the protection of particular 
vulnerable groups. “Pillar 4: Human Development” of the Ninth National Development Plan (NDP 9, 2020-2024) 
also focuses on building human capital and increasing resilience to shocks as the foundations for poverty reduction 
and promotion of shared prosperity. Similarly, the Somalia Social Protection Policy (2019) prioritizes a vision and 
strategies for a gradual transition to a nationally owned social protection system in Somalia “to address 
predictable needs through the life cycle in order to protect all groups, and particularly the poor and vulnerable, 
against shocks, help them to manage risks, and provide them with opportunities to overcome poverty, 
vulnerability, and exclusion.” In addition, the Social Protection Policy Implementation Framework (2020) is 
structured around seven policy priorities, including “unconditional assistance for the poorest and neediest,” and 
“building Systems and strengthening coordination,” which align directly with the objectives of the SNHCP AF. 
 
27. 
The proposed SNCHP AF remains aligned with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership 
Framework12 for the Republic of Somalia for FY19–22. The CPF highlights a scalable and reliable safety net system 
as a key contributor to one of its two objectives, that is, to improve delivery systems for inclusive social services. 
It also notes the need for the “Bank team [to] start work, together with international donor and humanitarian 
partners, to build the systems of government necessary to leverage existing cash-transfers towards a more 
sustainable social safety net system able to respond to shocks.” The SNHCP AF also supports the World Bank’s 
 
12 Given the frequency and acuity of climate induced shocks experienced by Somalia, the CPF has a strong focus on supporting efforts to 
mitigate against risks of climate shocks and impacts. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 49 
 
response to COVID-19 impacts in Somalia, which is detailed in Annex 1.  
 
28. 
The project is also well aligned with the World Bank Group’s Africa Regional Strategy (2019) and the 
Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV) 2020–2025. These strategies emphasize addressing fragility 
effectively requires a fundamentally different development approach based on innovative solutions and an 
adapted toolkit. As such, the strategies encourage leveraging partnerships with the United Nations in fragile 
situations. Further, they emphasize strengthening the humanitarian-development nexus as a key to effectively 
addressing fragility and entails, which the AF will continue to do, as described below. 
 
29. 
Lastly, the proposed SNHCP AF aims to continue strengthening the humanitarian-development nexus. 
The SNHCP AF will support the Parent Project’s objectives to establish the Baxnaano cash transfer delivery 
mechanism, including for shock response, which will enhance the resilience of targeted households by helping 
them avoid negative coping mechanisms and mitigate the impact of shocks, while also easing the financial burden 
on humanitarian assistance. In the medium term, the SNHCP is establishing the key building blocks of a national 
safety net system that can deliver a reliable, predictable, and scalable safety net for medium-term recovery and 
longer-term development outcomes. This is helping to strengthen capacities and institutional resilience of key 
institutions within the FGS, such as MoLSA, and FMS to ensure that the Government is empowered to adopt a 
greater role in delivering support to its people for sustainability. This is also demonstrating steps towards 
strengthening the social contract between the Government and its citizens.  
 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
A. Overview of the Additional Financing  
 
30. 
The proposed AF will support the continuation of the Component 1: Nutrition Linked Unconditional 
Cash Transfers with a total additional IDA grant amount of US$108 million. This will help to continue nutrition 
linked cash transfers for an additional two years once the cash assistance under the parent SNHCP is fully 
disbursed by June 2021, thereby ensuring smooth and uninterrupted delivery of cash assistance to existing 
beneficiaries for the full duration of three years before they are reassessed for eligibility for re-enrollment. In 
addition, the AF will support greater efforts to enable greater access by Baxnaano beneficiaries to health and 
education services and promote transformative behavioral changes, contributing to enhanced household level 
human capital accumulation. As such, the funding allocation for Component 3 will be increased to cater for 
increased project management and monitoring responsibilities, and the closing date will be extended by one year 
from August 31, 2022 under the Parent Project to August 31, 2023 under the AF in order ensure sufficient time to 
successfully complete all project activities. It is expected that the lessons from the implementation experience of 
the parent SNHCP, for example through the targeting evaluation, the delivery of mobile money payments, and the 
monitoring of the nutrition-linkages, will help to refine and strengthen the implementation of the Baxnaano and 
the delivery of cash under the AF.  
 
B. Project Development Objectives and Beneficiaries 
 
31. 
The PDO and development indicators will remain unchanged. The PDO will remain the same as the 
Parent Project to provide cash transfers to targeted poor and vulnerable households and establish the key building 
blocks of a national shock-responsive safety net system. Definitions of relevant indicators have been updated to 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 49 
 
incorporate climate considerations. 
 
32. 
Project beneficiaries will remain the same. The project beneficiaries will continue to be the 200,000 
chronically poor and vulnerable rural households (approximately 1.2 million individuals) that are particularly at 
risk of negative impacts caused by climate and other shocks and residing in 880 villages in 21 selected districts 
across Somalia selected under the parent SNHCP for the Baxnaano cash transfers. Mothers or female caregivers 
of the children will continue to be prioritized as the direct recipients of the quarterly cash transfers. 
 
C. Key Indicators and Results 
 
33. 
The PDO Level Indicators will remain unchanged, and definitions of relevant indicators in the Results 
Framework has been adjusted to include climate considerations. 
 
D. Project Components and Activities 
 
34. 
The proposed AF will support the continuation of the Component 1: Nutrition Linked Unconditional 
Cash Transfers. This will help to continue nutrition linked cash transfers for an additional two years once the cash 
assistance under the parent SNHCP is fully disbursed, thereby ensuring smooth and uninterrupted delivery of cash 
assistance to existing beneficiaries for the full duration of  two years before they are reassessed for eligibility for 
re-enrollment. In addition, the AF will support efforts to promote access by Baxnaano beneficiaries to health and 
education services, as feasible, as well as promote transformative behavioral changes through awareness raising 
and messaging, contributing to enhanced human capital accumulation.  Component 2 will remain unchanged. 
However, funding allocation for Component 3 will be increased to cater for increased project management and 
monitoring responsibilities. The closing date will also be extended to allow for sufficient time to successfully 
complete all project activities.  
 
35. 
Component 1: Nutrition Linked Unconditional Cash Transfers (US$108 million equivalent). The 
allocation of an additional US$108 million equivalent under this component will support the continuation of 
quarterly cash transfer payments to the 200,000 existing Baxnaano beneficiary households from Quarter 5 
payments onwards. Specifically, it will continue to provide unconditional cash transfers to households that are 
chronically poor and particularly vulnerable to climate and other shocks and link them to complementary 
nutritional support programs. The objectives will remain unchanged to: (a) support households to strengthen their 
resilience and avoid negative coping mechanisms to meet their basic needs due to chronic poverty and 
vulnerability to climate and other shocks, and (b) promote human capital accumulation  in the medium to long 
term by linking beneficiary households to complementary nutrition services and continuing to smooth 
consumption gaps resulting from climate and other shocks through predictable and reliable provision of cash 
transfer. Selected households will continue to be provided a monthly payment of US$20 delivered quarterly 
through mobile money platforms, whereby free SIM cards are provided to beneficiary households that lack them. 
Mothers or female caregivers of children will continue to be prioritized as the direct recipients of the transfer. 
Final selection of target districts has been based on an objective distress index agreed with MoLSA and involved 
in-depth discussions and consultations with the FMSs. Implementation of Component 1 will continue to be 
supported by WFP under an amended service contract arrangement with MoLSA.  
 
36. 
The proposed AF will also continue to support efforts to enhance demand by Baxnaano beneficiaries of 
social services for improved human capital accumulation, taking into account supply constraints. The Baxnaano 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 49 
 
has been designed to enhance demands of nutrition services by targeted poor and vulnerable households through 
nuanced sensitization and awareness raising efforts aimed at promoting positive behavior change for improved 
nutrition practices. At the same time, it also strives to link beneficiaries to available nutrition services for nutrition 
outcomes and human capital accumulation. Taking a gradual approach in consideration of capacity limitations, 
the focus in the first year of implementation has been to establish the foundations of a the cash transfer system, 
with the understanding that more concerted efforts will be given in following years to support beneficiary 
households’ access to nutrition services (delivered through nutrition programs of WFP and/or providers).  
 
37. 
Specifically, the AF will build on the progress to date of the Parent Project to enhance cash transfer 
linkages with the health and education sectors for enhanced human development outcomes. A technical 
committee has been established comprising of specialists from MoLSA,  Ministry of Health,  WFP, UNICEF, and the 
World Bank to map out available nutrition services to which Baxnaano beneficiaries could be better linked, as well 
as to explore ways in which systematic monitoring can be undertaken of referrals provided to Baxnaano 
beneficiaries and of their uptake of the services. Under the AF, the technical committee membership will be 
broadened to include relevant education experts and the mapping will be expanded to cover education services 
also. The proposed AF will also explore ways to provide further support to field workers (e.g. WFP’s non-
governmental organization (NGO) cooperating partners, Community Health Workers etc.) to proactively promote 
education, health, and nutrition messaging and facilitate transformative behavior changes. To that end, on-going 
collaboration between the parent SNHCP and the World Bank-funded pipeline Somalia Education for Human 
Capital Development Project (P172434) and the Improving Healthcare Services in Somalia Project (P172031) will 
continue for improved linkages across sectors.13 It is also noteworthy that a functioning USR, currently under 
development through Component 2 of the parent SNHCP, will be instrumental in supporting coordination and 
linkages between different social and other services.  
 
38. 
Component 2 will remain the unchanged. 
 
39. 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation and Knowledge Management (US$2 
million equivalent). The funding allocation for Component 3 will be increased to cater for increased project 
management and monitoring responsibilities under the proposed AF, including expanding the scope of the TPM 
to ensure continued monitoring of the delivery of cash transfers under the AF and learn from beneficiary feedback 
to improve implementation.  
 
E. Climate Co-Benefits 
 
40. 
The proposed project has been assessed to mitigate against short- and long-term climate change and 
shocks. The climate vulnerability of the project has been identified, and climate adaptation measures have been 
incorporated in the project design. The proposed SNHCP AF will continue to provide cash transfer to households 
in the "Stressed" category of food insecurity living in remote rural areas of Somalia affected by multiple climate-
induced natural disasters, such as droughts, floods, and locust invasion, as  well as the recent unprecedented 
COVID-19 pandemic. These shocks disproportionately impact poor and vulnerable households that have limited 
capacity to respond, and as a result, often resort to negative coping mechanisms that could be harmful to the 
 
13 The education project design considers Baxnaano districts in its geographical targeting and ensures that in areas of overlap with the 
Baxnaano, safety net beneficiaries will be supported with education services. For the health project, while target locations are yet to be 
finalized, focus is being given on how safety net access to households (HHs) can be leveraged to promote health messages through existing 
community health workers. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 49 
 
climate, such as cutting down trees to make charcoal for sale. Consequently, the continuation of predictable and 
reliable cash transfers under the revised Component 1 of the proposed AF will contribute to building the resilience 
of households against climate and other shocks, as it will enable them meet urgent needs and mitigate climate 
induced flood/drought/pests risks, as well as avoid harmful negative coping strategies. Therefore, the project has 
been assessed to have the potential to increase climate co-benefits, and definitions of relevant indicator 
descriptions have been adjusted to incorporate climate considerations.14 
 
F. Gender  
 
41. 
Women and girls in Somalia have been disproportionately impacted by the multiple crises and food 
insecurity as they face specific challenges to social, economic and decision-making access. Article 11 on Equality 
of the Provisional Constitution of the Federal Republic of Somalia, stipulates that “All citizens, regardless of sex, 
religion, social or economic status, political opinion, clan, disability, occupation, birth or dialect shall have equal 
rights and duties before the law.” Nonetheless, traditional and religious norms limit women’s roles outside the 
domestic sphere, thereby restricting participation in political and public decision-making forums. For example, 
despite their increasing engagement in economic activities, women’s involvement in wage labor remains low (33–
40 percent) and predominantly concentrated in the agriculture and informal sector. 
 
42. 
GBV continues to be a threat to women and girls throughout Somalia. A 2016 GBV survey commissioned 
by the World Bank and United Nations partners found that 17 percent of women have experienced some form of 
physical or sexual violence from a non-partner. Data emerging from the GBV Information Management System 
reveals that over 14,000 cases of GBV were reported from January 2015 through June 2016. Of the total number 
of cases, over 50 percent were cases of physical assault, while incidence of rape and sexual assault ranged from 
30 percent to 34 percent during this period. A significant share of these cases—roughly 20 percent—were 
perpetrated against girls under the age of 17 years. Further, intimate partner violence is a common experience 
that has been found to be often linked to women’s engagement in income-generating activities, affecting 36 
percent of women interviewed. Displaced women and girls are among the most affected due to extreme poverty, 
marginalization and conflict, and exposure to the impact of recurrent climate-related shocks, such as droughts.  
 
43. 
The proposed SNHCP AF will continue to tackle these gender gaps and GBV risks in three ways. First, the 
project will continue to prioritize women as the direct recipient of the cash transfers, thereby improving women’s 
access to predictable income and closing the gap on income inequality and enhancing women’s decision-making 
power in the household and community. Second, the provision of free SIM cards to facilitate mobile payments is 
also expected to improve women’s financial inclusion by connecting them to the broader mobile money platform, 
which can be used for other financial activities besides receipt of cash assistance. The SNHCP AF is also expected 
to contribute to improved health, nutrition and education welfare of mothers and children, as it will continue to 
link women and children to broader social services in addition to the cash assistance, thereby supporting human 
capital accumulation at the household level. In the medium to longer term, it is envisioned that sustained cash 
transfer support will help smooth consumption gaps, increase food consumption, reduce prevalence of 
malnutrition, secure basic needs, diversify livelihoods, and lead to investments in human capital and economic 
inclusion of  women, contributed to enhanced gender equity overall. Third, continued cash assistance is expected 
to mitigate risks of GBV incidents and support GBV survivors, as detailed below. 
 
 
14 The assessment of climate co-benefit is performed only to the WBG financing portion (International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (IBRD) and IDA) of a project and does not include trust fund or Government co-financing.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 49 
 
44. 
The project is also expected to continue to positively impact on GBV and sexual exploitation and abuse 
(SEA) incidents and support survivors of GBV due to project activities. Broadly, the AF will continue to support 
efforts under the Parent Project to strengthen household resilience and address a number of factors that may 
otherwise exacerbate GBV risks through the provision of predictable and reliable cash transfers. For example, cash 
assistance to poor and vulnerable households enable women and girls to avoid moving to urban areas and IDP 
camps during shocks, which is a common coping strategy during emergencies, minimizing their exposure to GBV 
and SEA. However, as cash transfers may also increase exposure to GBV and SEA in the short term, the AF will 
continue the robust GBV risk mitigation and response measures established by the Parent Project. Field facilitation 
will also continue to be supported by NGOs, including women staff, to ensure effective outreach to female 
beneficiaries to sensitize them regarding GBV and SEA. The TPM agency and GRM already include female workers 
to facilitate reach to women and ensure that they are able to voice any potential concerns or complaints in a safe 
environment. Progress on supporting the closing of the gender gaps will be measured through gender-specific and 
gender-disaggregated data in the M&E framework, including the indicators on “number of direct beneficiary 
households of cash transfers (equivalent to direct women’s recipients)” and “percentage of women who benefited 
from the nutrition services.”  
 
G. Citizen Engagement 
 
45. 
The proposed SNHCP AF will continue to use the citizen engagement mechanisms already in place for 
the Baxnaano, namely the established GRM and the community mobilization and sensitization processes. The 
SNHCP AF will follow the same delivery model of the Baxnaano, and as such will continue to be largely a 
community-based project with strong community engagement. Specifically, citizens’ feedback will be channeled 
through the strong monitoring arrangements in place, including through the TPM and potential partnership with 
the FCDO MESH call center to solicit beneficiary feedback following the payment of the quarterly transfers. 
Moreover, the GRM systems and procedures used by the WFP in the provision of cash transfers will continue to 
be utilized as a platform that allows communities and stakeholders to provide feedback and submit complaints 
and grievances if and when they perceive that a negative impact has arisen due to the project interventions. This 
mechanism operates at the local level and is accessible at no cost to communities and stakeholders. The 
mechanism is adequately staffed and operates with a 360-degree monitoring and reporting process to enable 
tracking of complaint resolution time, including the frequency of feedback to the complainant about their 
complaint status and resolution. Community-level structures, such as the community beneficiary selection 
committees established by WFP and composed of diverse group of community members, serve to deepen the 
understanding of project scope, design and operational cycles, as well as raise awareness of the rights and 
entitlements of the beneficiaries, facilitated by WFP’s cooperating partners. Through the Baxnaano, MoLSA has 
also established a national GRM call center embedded in the country systems to enable robust and regular citizen 
feedback in cash transfer programs, learning from the experience of the Parent Project and the World Bank-
funded SNLRP. 
 
H. Implementation and Partnerships  
 
46. 
Implementation arrangements of the AF will remain unchanged. Supported by the PIU, MoLSA will 
continue to be responsible for overall project implementation and monitoring, as well as compliance with fiduciary 
and safeguards requirements. The Standard Output Agreement signed between MoLSA and WFP for the delivery 
of the nutrition-linked unconditional cash transfers under the parent SNHCP Component 1 will be amended to 
reflect the continued delivery of cash from Quarter 5 payments onwards under the proposed SNHCP AF. To ensure 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 49 
 
robust monitoring, a TPM agency will continue its quarterly monitoring and verification of the cash benefits 
throughout the additional coverage months under the AF, with either the contract of the existing TPM agency to 
be amended or a new TPM agency to be hired, as deemed appropriate.   
 
47. 
Opportunities for partnerships with other development partners will continue to be explored under the 
SNHCP AF. The World Bank will continue to engage and update the Somalia Donor Working Group on the progress 
of Baxnaano in an effort to advance dialogue on the alignment of humanitarian assistance with Baxnaano and the 
role of national safety nets in the gradual transition from humanitarian to government-led development 
approaches. Bilateral discussions with key donors will also continue to better coordinate and collaborate on safety 
net interventions, including with MPF donors for possible joint/coordinated programming and financing.   
 
I. 
Project Closing Date 
 
48. 
The project closing date will be extended by one-year from August 31, 2022 to August 31, 2023. The 
longer end date is in consideration of the additional activities envisioned under Component 1 to allow for sufficient 
time to successfully complete all project activities.  
 
J. Budget and Financing 
 
49. 
Project Costs:  The project costs will be allocated across Components, as shown in Table 1. 
 
Table 1. Current and Proposed Project Costs and Financing, broken down by Components 
 
SNHCP AF Components 
Parent 
Project  
(US$, million) 
SNHCP AF 
(US$, million) 
Total Project 
Cost  
(US$, million) 
Component 1: Nutrition-Linked Unconditional Cash Transfer 
53.0 
108.0 
161.0 
Component 2: Delivery Systems and Institutional Capacity Building 
6.0 
0.0 
6.0 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, 
and Knowledge Management  
6.0 
2.0 
8.0 
Total IDA Financing  
65.0 
110.0 
175.0 
 
III. 
KEY RISKS 
 
50. 
In line with the Parent Project, the overall risk rating for the proposed SNHCP AF remains Substantial. 
The delivery of the SNHCP AF will take place against a highly risky country context and implementation 
environment. Somalia’s FCV country context with fluid political context and on-going insecurity, compounded by 
political uncertainties and a lack of government presence in parts of the country, mean that Political and 
Governance risks remain High. Similarly, fiduciary risks also continue to be High, as country’s public FM and 
procurement legal frameworks are still weak, fragmented, and inadequate. This is exacerbated by the World 
Bank’s limited access to the project sites, an emerging and weakly regulated banking sector, and inadequate 
institutional and human resource capacities. Risks related to Macroeconomics, Sector Strategies and Policies, 
Institutional Capacity, and Social Safeguards are assessed to be Substantial. Specifically, risks related to 
Macroeconomics have been upgraded from Moderate to Substantial given the risks that inflation poses on the 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 49 
 
value of the cash assistance and purchasing power of the beneficiaries. Other risks, mainly related to conflict and 
insecurity, also continue to be rated Substantial, as Somalia faces significant security challenges, which affect 
access to locations and pose insecurity risks for beneficiaries and project workers. All existing mitigation measures 
identified under the parent SNHCP to these risks and challenges will continue to be implemented under the AF, 
and new mitigation measures will also be applied to emerging risks identified during implementation, as 
appropriate.  
Table 2. Risk Categories and Ratings of the SNHCP 
Risk Category 
Rating (H, S, M, L) 
1. Political and governance  
H 
2. Macroeconomics 
S 
3. Sector strategies and policies 
S 
4.Technical design of project 
M 
5. Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability 
S 
6. Fiduciary  
H 
7. Environment and social  
S 
8. Stakeholders 
M 
9. Other 
S 
Overall  
Substantial 
 
51. 
Political and governance risks are rated High. The continuation of cash assistance face high political and 
governance risks. The recent political uncertainties, complex relationship between the FGS, FMS and Somaliland,  
lack of government presence in parts of the country, a volatile security situation, and the ongoing anti-terror 
campaign can restrict access to project sites for cash delivery and/or monitoring of implementation. Mitigating 
measures will include ongoing engagement with UN agencies, NGOs, and private sector entities who already have 
good working relationships with the FGS, FMS, and communities through humanitarian interventions. The 
proposed AF also provides an operational platform for promoting the dialogue between federal government and 
FMS around protecting poor and vulnerable citizens and building bridged for collaboration in service delivery. 
 
52. 
Macroeconomics risks are rated Substantial. Somalia is one of the world’s poorest countries with fiscal 
fragility and weak revenue base, and the FGS depends greatly on donor funding to support poor and vulnerable 
communities affected by repeated shocks. The on-going COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with floods and locust 
invasion, have further weakened the Government’s revenue base amidst a context of decreasing foreign 
assistance due to economic contraction in donor countries. The World Bank, working with others such as the 
International Monetary Fund, is engaged in strengthening the overall macroeconomic and fiscal framework. 
Nonetheless, risks of inflation in the short term could result in a significant loss of value of the cash assistance and 
the purchasing power of the beneficiaries. Consequently, the AF will undertake regular price monitoring and 
market assessment to gauge the impact of cash on beneficiary household and discuss on possibilities of adjusting 
the cash transfer value, as appropriate and feasible. 
 
53. 
Sector strategies and policies risk is rated Substantial. The FGS is strongly committed to establishing a 
government-led SP system. The principles of SP are embedded in the NDP 9, as well as the Somalia Social 
Protection Policy and the Social Protection Policy Implementation Framework, which have been finalized and 
approved by the FGS. Nonetheless, changes in government leadership and significant capacity constraints at all 
levels of government pose substantial risks to ensuring full ownership and leadership of the SP agenda given the 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 49 
 
complexities of a well-designed national SP strategies and policies. Further, evolving relationships under the 
federal system of governance in relation to representation and power and resource sharing complicate efforts to 
reach agreements on institutional and governance arrangements between the federal and state levels for safety 
net delivery. Implementation of cash assistance through a UN agency further risks undermining the role of the 
FGS in providing urgently needed support to its poorest and most vulnerable population 
 
54. 
These risks will continue to be monitored and mitigated through components 2 and 3 activities under 
the parent SNHCP. Specifically, components 2 and 3 under the Parent Project support policy development and 
institutional strengthening and promote the leadership of the FGS in administering the Baxnaano and engaging 
the FMS in project consultation (e.g. geographical targeting) and monitoring activities. Specifically, Component 2 
focuses on policy support, capacity building, and institutional development at the federal and FMS levels, 
leveraging on existing relationships of, and ongoing relevant efforts by, UNICEF. The Government-Donor Social 
Protection Working Group, chaired by MoLSA, with representation from the FMS, relevant ministries and 
development partners, is an ongoing platform for technical and institutional guidance, advancing policy dialogue, 
and ensuring coordination and alignment among SP and safety net-related programs. A high level National Social 
Protection Steering Committee has also been established to guide the development and implementation of 
relevant legal and regulatory frameworks, support intra-governmental collaboration, and execute an oversight 
role over implementing ministries/authorities. Moreover, a Capacity Development Plan has been developed for 
the MoLSA PIU and relevant stakeholders at the FGS and FMS levels, including knowledge exchange and technical 
and hands-on training, to deepen understanding and commitment of SP issues within the various levels of 
Government. Further, Component 3 aims to give visibility to the Government’s leadership in administering the 
Baxnaano by supporting the implementation of a strong communication strategy; lead dialogue with the member 
states, local authorities and communities; and undertake a visible role in monitoring implementation progress and 
redressing grievances.  
 
55. 
Technical design of the project risk has been downgraded to Moderate. Through close dialogue on the 
geographic and household eligibility selection criteria, the Parent Project has succeeded in avoiding political 
capture in the targeting process by the FGS and subnational authorities. Elite capture has been avoided by 
engaging local communities in beneficiary selection through an inclusive community-based process with the 
support of and monitoring by NGO partners. A total of 880 villages in 21 districts have been finalized for Baxnaano 
implementation, with the selection of rural beneficiary communities being limited to areas where WFP has access 
and is able to monitor activities. The choice of WFP as the implementing partner has been a key mitigation 
measure given its reputation for political neutrality, extensive experience on the ground and objective and 
transparent fund allocation. WFP has also implemented extensive and ongoing communications activities to 
sensitize communities about the government cash transfer program, including beneficiary selection criteria, 
consent for data sharing with the FGS, and data protection, among others. Further, WFP is using its monitoring 
and GRM to address any potential deviation from the project roles, the UK FCDO MESH call center is soliciting 
quarterly beneficiary feedback, and MoLSA has contracted a TPM firm that is conducting quarterly verifications of 
payment processes to identify corrective actions, if any.  
 
56. 
Risk related to institutional capacity is rated Substantial. While the institutional capacity of MoLSA is 
growing due to increasing experience of direct implementation of World Bank-funded projects, the fragile country 
context and difficult operating environment characterized by fluid political context and on-going insecurity 
continue to pose significant risk to implementation. The MoLSA PIU is fully established and engaged in the day-
to-day implementation and monitoring of the project. Under Component 2 of the Parent Project, UNICEF has 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 49 
 
developed a Capacity Development Plan to further enhance the capacity of the PIU and relevant stakeholders. 
The World Bank is providing close monitoring and review of the parent SNHCP on a regular basis and will continue 
to provide technical assistance to build the procurement and FM capacity of the PIU. Nonetheless, a risk of 
possible political interference and/or security risks given the current climate of political uncertainties remain, 
calling for caution and a Substantial rating. The continued partnership with WFP for the delivery of cash transfers 
directly to beneficiaries under the AF however provides an important mitigation measure. 
 
57. 
Fiduciary risks. The overall combined FM and procurement fiduciary risk rating for the project is High. The 
FM risk is rated High, while the overall procurement assessment risk is Substantial. The country’s public FM and 
procurement legal frameworks remain weak, fragmented, and inadequate. This is compounded by limited access 
to the client/project sites, an emerging and weakly regulated banking sector, and inadequate institutional and 
human capital capacities. The World Bank’s close fiduciary supervision has thus been essential, with mitigation 
measures for fiduciary issues built into the Parent Project design in the form of strict fiduciary control mechanisms 
and application of World Bank fiduciary rules as well as a focus on social accountability. Going forward, the AF will 
ensure that the PIU always has dedicated procurement and FM specialists in place, who are adequately trained, 
jointly with External Assistance Fiduciary Section15 (EAFS) and other relevant staff within the Office of the 
Accountant General. The TORs for the FM and Procurement Specialists include clear capacity building initiatives 
with clear knowledge transfer arrangements to support development of sustainable FM and procurement capacity 
within Government. These risk mitigation measures are integrated into the AF design and fully aligned to the 
country’s procurement and public FM systems to further deepen the use of country systems. These measures 
have ensured Satisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory ratings in the Implementation Status and Results Reports 
for the past 12 months.  
 
58. 
Environmental and social risks. While the proposed SNHCP AF has minimal environmental risks and 
impacts, it does face significant social risks and impacts, and as such, the environmental and social risk has been 
rated Substantial. Key social risks relate to: (i) security of payments to target beneficiaries; (ii) exclusion of the 
target population and particularly poor, vulnerable and minority women from project benefits; (iii) gender 
dynamics that can be restrictive for women and girls leading to exacerbation of GBV/SEA where registration for 
cash transfers is exchanged for sexual favors; (iv) systemic weakness to respond to social risks; (v) remoteness and 
other security risks that restrict access to areas in Somalia for effective stakeholder engagement, community 
participation and grievance redress; and vi) breach of data security related to the collection, use, and storage of 
data for the Unified Social Registry. These risks will be mitigated largely through the partnership with WFP for the 
delivery of cash through a mobile money platform. For example, WFP has strong procedures and arrangements in 
place to identify and manage data protection and insecurity risks. Beneficiary data will only be transferred from 
WFP to FGS’ USR upon the development and endorsement of the Data Protection Act by FGS. Further, the 
selection of the original project locations where the AF will operate only included relatively stable and accessible 
area. The use of mobile money delivery mechanism also helps to mitigate security risks related to payments as 
well as possible capture of cash assistance. The Parent Project has already established adequate GRM and other 
mechanisms to address GBV risks and respond to GBV incidents due to project activities, detailed in the Social 
 
15 To foster sustainability, the EAFS units are staffed with mainstream civil servants supported by targeted Technical Assistance with clear 
Terms of Reference outlining measures to promote knowledge transfer and an exit strategy. Additional in-built sustainability arrangement 
for the PFM professionalization will be annexed as part of the EAFS units civil service scheme of service for the PFM job family to create a 
cohort of competent PFM practitioners in government. The PFM Education and training program continue to gradually build critical mass 
of PFM professionals with a good mix of skills to perform a broad range of PFM tasks.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 49 
 
Management Plan and GBV Action Plan.16 Lastly, WFP’s established systems and capacities will continue to be 
utilized to mitigate risks related to systemic weaknesses, including on monitoring of implementation of mitigation 
measures, while MoLSA continues to strengthen its safeguards capacities. 
 
59. 
Other. Other risks in Somalia include conflict and insecurity risks, which continue to be rated Substantial. 
The country faces significant security challenges, which affect access to locations and pose insecurity risks for 
beneficiaries and project workers, both national and international. By design, the AF, similar to the Parent Project, 
will only operate in relatively permissive parts of the country, as security of operations and access to sites for 
monitoring and supervision were key criteria in the selection of the current districts for support. Moreover, given 
that payments continue to be delivered entirely through mobile money platforms, security risks are considered 
to be more easily mitigated. Further, the choice of WFP as an implementing partner provides the project access 
to the UN system and local capacity for identifying and managing security threats to operations. The local NGOs 
that WFP works through are well-embedded within the local communities, with strong local knowledge that is 
critical in monitoring and responding to security risks. 
IV. 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
A. Economic and Financial Analysis  
 
60. 
Global evidence shows that safety net programs of different types have important effects on reducing 
poverty and vulnerability, along with improving other indicators of household welfare.17 One important channel 
is simply the income effect through a cash transfer. Additional research finds that providing unconditional cash 
grants to low-income households can lead to various benefits for recipients, such as increased income, improved 
psychological well-being, and greater empowerment for women.18 This is particularly important in the context of 
Somalia where some 71 percent of the population lives in poverty.  
 
61. 
Impact of safety net support on poverty. The Baxnaano seeks to target the poorest households, those 
whose living standards are estimated to be at half of the national poverty line. The benefit amount to beneficiaries 
of US$20 per household per month represents approximately eight percent of the poverty line and eleven percent 
of the food poverty line.19 Therefore, the Project is expected to contribute to reducing the depth of poverty for 
targeted communities and extreme poverty will be reduced slightly.  
 
62. 
Level of transfers compared to basic food needs. Continued cash transfers will protect beneficiary 
households from extreme food insecurity due to the locust, droughts and COVID-19 shocks. The benefit amount 
of US$20 per household per month represents around 30 percent of the average cost of the “basic food items” 
 
16 The Parent Project has trained relevant staff and NGOs on GBV issues and on monitoring and reporting of incidents, if and when they 
materialize, and has established practical approaches to referral of survivors to available services. Sensitization of men and the wider 
community on gender and GBV issues will continue under the AF, based on the existing GBV Action Plan.  
17 Hanna, Rema and Olken, Benjamin A. 2018 “Universal Basic Incomes vs. Targeted Transfers: Anti-Poverty Programs in Developing 
Countries.” NBER Working Paper No. w24939, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3239275.  
18 Haushofer, Johannes, and Jeremy Shapiro. 2016. “The Short-Term Impact of Unconditional Cash Transfers to the Poor: Experimental 
Evidence from Kenya.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 131 (4): 1973–2042 
19 Somalia High Frequency Survey, 2017. The international poverty line of USD 1.90 (2011 PPP) was equivalent to 1.40 in 2017 Somalia USD. 
The food poverty line was 1.02 in 2017 Somalia USD.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 49 
 
and 20 percent of the average cost of the “Minimum Expenditure Basket (MEB).”20 The contribution of the 
Baxnaano relative to the rural MEB is likely significantly greater.21 
 
63. 
The continuation of the SNHCP cash assistance is expected to have an important impact in supporting 
basic levels of consumption, diminishing reliance on destructive short-term coping mechanisms, and enhancing 
investments in human and productive capital. Several studies have found that independent of emergency or 
regular cash transfers, households used income from the transfers largely to meet their basic consumption needs, 
mainly food. Further, it is well recognized that cash transfers in times of shocks can prevent households from 
having to resort to negative coping strategies, which can make it difficult for households to regain their previous 
income level following the shock, and can trap families in cycles of extreme poverty. The continuation of cash 
assistance for additional two years  will thus likely provide target households with the flexibility to use the cash 
according to changing priorities and needs, including meeting food gaps, storing food for future shocks, protecting 
their current assets, invest in children’s health and education and invest in livelihood and income generation 
activities, etc. In addition, cash transfers targeted to women is expected to increase their decision-making on the 
extent to which cash grant is spent on food and regarding the choice of food purchases. 
 
64. 
Baxnaano transfers are not designed to fully meet consumption needs of targeted households. The 
Baxnaano benefit is intended to smooth consumption gaps for poor households and mitigate the adverse impact 
of climate and other shocks, rather than address the full range of consumption needs the way humanitarian 
transfers often do. As such, it is expected that Baxnaano beneficiaries will also rely on other income and livelihood 
sources to support their consumption needs. However, a predictable safety net provides a cushion against the 
impact of consumption gap and/or loss of livelihood. 
 
65. 
In the context of limited food availability given the concurrent crises, limited imports, and reduced 
crops, there could be a potential for some pressure on prices, albeit estimated to be minimal. As the coverage 
of the Baxnaano is not large enough, it is likely that the transfers will not generate significant pressures on prices, 
although a modest increase in prices would be expected. However, the price pressures will be derived from the 
supply side constraints (lack of infrastructure, market access etc.). The AF will closely monitor food availability and 
potential price increase due to the cash transfer, which is a key part of WFP’s work. 
  
B. Technical Analysis  
65. 
Strategic relevance. Predictable and reliable cash assistance under Somalia’s first government-led safety 
net program, Baxnaano, is playing a critical role in protecting poor and vulnerable households impacted by food 
insecurity, livelihood loss, and malnutrition due to repeated climate and other shocks. Sustainable and predictable 
cash assistance enables Baxnaano households to invest in their children’s health and education and protect their 
livelihood assets. It also contributes to reduction of extreme poverty and enhances citizen’s trust in the 
Government and public institutions. The proposed AF will ensure the on-going support to the existing beneficiaries 
without interruption in cash transfers, as they face compounding and multidimensional shocks. The SNHCP AF will 
 
20 The MEB represents minimum set of basic food items such as sorghum, vegetable oil and sugar, comprising 2,100 kilocalories/person/day 
basic energy requirement for a household of 6–7 members, and non-food items such as such as water, kerosene, firewood, soap and cereal 
grinding costs. Estimates are based on all regions’ average prices in urban towns.  
21 Partial comparison of the composition of the urban and rural MEBs indicates that rural areas have significantly lower prices on some core 
non-food items, such as school fees (90,000 Somali Shillings in urban areas versus 52,000 Somali Shillings in rural are) and cost of human 
drugs (20,000 Somali Shillings in urban area and 10,000 in rural areas). Further, cost of firewood is assumed to be zero in rural areas, unlike 
in urban areas. With regard to food items, a larger share of self-produced foods would likely result in lower prices. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 49 
 
also continue to complement humanitarian interventions that focus largely on urban areas with IDP camps. By 
building the resilience of the rural poor, the AF is likely helping to reduce the rural to urban migration during 
droughts and lessen the burden on humanitarian assistance in the medium to longer term. 
66. 
Regular and predictable cash enables families to meet their basic needs of food and non-food items and 
protect their physical and human assets. Cash provides liquidity to purchase food and basic necessities and 
protect human capital. According to the feedback solicited from 1,089 Baxnaano beneficiaries during June 30, 
2020 and August 31, 2020, Baxnaano was the only cash support beneficiaries received in the previous two months 
for 96 percent of the respondents, and 98.8 percent of those surveyed spent ‘most or all’ money on food. 
Households have reported the use of cash transfers in purchasing clothes for children, education and school fees, 
water and debt repayment.  
 
67. 
Technical soundness. The AF will enable the continued delivery of critical cash transfers without 
interruptions in payment beyond Quarter 4 (delivered  in March 2021) to 200,000 poor and vulnerable households 
(equivalent to about 1.2 million people) in 21 highly distressed districts across Somalia, at a critical time when 
Somalia is facing multi-dimensional and compounding shocks. Geographical and household targeting follow an 
objective and transparent methodology. Importantly the direct recipients of the benefits are women, who also 
get access to mobile banking and therefore enhance their economic inclusion.  Delivery of cash benefits will follow 
the established regular schedule of quarterly payments to secure predictability of when households would expect 
receiving the benefits, therefore supporting their decision making on household expenditures and investments.  
 
68. 
The proposed AF will be delivered using the established mechanism for Baxnaano that are working well.  
MoLSA will amend the Standard Output Agreement for the parent SNHCP to engage WFP to support the 
implementation of the cash transfers from Quarter 5 onwards (due June 2021) under the AF. WFP has well 
established mechanisms for transfer of mobile payments via local telecom providers, and stringent verification 
and monitoring procedures for ensuring the effective and timely delivery of the quarterly transfers. MoLSA will 
continue to play an important role in the overall management of the project, consulting with and engaging FMS, 
working closely with WFP to address any implementation challenges and undertake monitoring activities including 
the engagement of the TPM for the expanded period of cash transfers.   
 
69. 
The SNHCP AF will also utilize the established M&E procedures under the Parent Project to ensure 
accountable and effective implementation of project activities. Accountability and risks of leakage and fraud will 
continue being monitored and mitigated through a multilayered monitoring process, established under the Parent 
Project. These will include the use of: (a) secure biometrically enhanced beneficiary identification, (b) transfer of 
electronic beneficiary lists to the mobile network provider through secure data exchange protocols, (c) using the 
established GRM to address grievances/complaints, (d) regular field monitoring by WFP and MoLSA staff, and (e) 
on-going TPM of project implementation through a TPM agency contracted by MoLSA. 
 
70. 
The proposed AF mitigates the risks of COVID-19 contagion while ensuring delivery of critical cash 
transfers through the use of the COVID-19 adaptation plan and mobile money payments adopted for the 
Baxnaano. The continued use of mobile payments, provision of personal protective equipment to project workers, 
and enforcement of relevant risk prevention guidance, such as social distancing during community events, use of 
virtual platforms for training and meetings etc., will mitigate the risk of contagion due to project activities and 
enable continued smooth implementation. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 49 
 
C. Financial Management 
 
71. 
The FM arrangements for the AF will mirror the arrangements under the Parent Project. The Office of 
the Accountant General and Auditor General will be central counterparts in the management and oversight of FM 
arrangements and the implementation of risk mitigation measures. In line with smart fiduciary principles and 
similar to the Parent Project, FM arrangements for the AF will also be centralized and managed by special units, 
namely the EAFS, headed by the EAFS Director and reporting to the Accountant General. The EAFS units are 
designed to ensure harmonization, donor coordination, reduction in duplication, fragmentation, and proliferation 
of donor-specific FM units. Like other projects implemented through country systems, the EAFS using the Financial 
Management Information System (FMIS) will prepare and publish project financial reports as part of government-
wide fiscal performance reports.  
 
72. 
Budgeting Arrangements. The PIU will continue to work in close consultation with the Budget Director at 
the Ministry of Finance, the EAFS and WFP to (i) prepare cash projection for the AF, (ii) request for adequate 
budget allocation for anticipated disbursements and expenditures during FY21 and the outer years, and (iii) amend 
the UN Commitment based on the amended output agreement signed between the Government (MoLSA) and 
relevant UN agency (WFP). Similar to the Parent Project, before the projected estimates are incorporated in the 
Government Appropriation Bills, they will be submitted to the World Bank for the necessary review and approvals. 
The work plans, cash flow projections, and budget include the project activities and amounts according to the 
Government financial year analyzed by month and quarter and delineated by components and categories, 
including the UN Commitments allocations. The World Bank approved budget and projected annual 
disbursements will be ‘on-budget,’ and will be posted into the respective FMIS according to the approved Standard 
Chart of Accounts (SCoA). The share of project financing will be integrated into the Parent Project and posted by 
appropriate SCoA funding source to facilitate generation of project periodic reports by funding source. The 
integrated project’s budget utilization reports shall be prepared from the Government FMIS, as a sub-set of the 
Government Treasury Single Account fiscal reports. 
 
73. 
Flow of Funds and Banking Arrangements. The SNHCP AF will be channeled through the existing project 
Designated Account (DA). All the expenditures for the Parent Project and the AF incurred through the DAs, as well 
as those submitted through client connection for direct payments will be justified, supported and eligible as 
defined in the Project Paper and the financing agreement. All project Withdrawal Applications will be made in US 
Dollars and will be submitted online through the client connection portal. Replenishment and reimbursement 
Withdrawal Applications will be accompanied by Statements of Expenditures in accordance with the procedures 
established in the Disbursement and Financial Letter and the Disbursement Guidelines. Detailed disbursement 
arrangements will be documented in the Disbursement Letters. The EAFS Units in consultation with the respective 
Offices of the Accountant General, Director General and alternate signatories will institute adequate controls in 
the management of the DAs. The DA will be operated in line with the established DA mandates for the Parent 
Project.  
 
74. 
Accounting and internal control arrangements. The AF will be accounted for on a cash basis in line with 
the arrangements under the existing project. These will be supported with appropriate records and 
documentation to track commitments and to safeguard assets. The SNHCP AF budgets and expenditure will be 
classified to facilitate the preparation of relevant reports and financial statements, including information on total 
project expenditures, total expenditure on each project component/activity, and analysis of that total expenditure 
into various categories of goods, training, consultants and other procurement and disbursement categories. The 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 49 
 
project FM arrangements are spelled out in the EAFS Manuals, which are being phased out and replaced with 
Comprehensive Operations and Accounting Procedures Manuals,22 a move aimed at strengthening the use of 
county systems. The accounting records will be maintained in US Dollars and integrated with the Parent Project. 
Like the parent SNHCP, the AF activities will be mapped to the FMIS using the SCoA to facilitate recording and 
reporting of all the project financial information, including information on total project expenditures, total 
expenditure on each project component/activity, and analysis of that total expenditure into various categories. 
All the project financial management records will be maintained in hard copied at the EAFS as well as in electronic 
format archived in the FMIS across all the regions.  
 
75. 
Financial Reporting Arrangements. All project financial reports will be generated directly from the single 
integrated window through Government FMIS and as sub-set of the various authorities’ treasury single account 
fiscal summary reports. Quarterly unaudited interim financial reports will be prepared by the EAFS in consultation 
with the PIU and will cover all project funds. For purposes of monitoring project implementation progress, the 
reports shall be submitted to the World Bank within 45 days after the end of the quarter. The reports will cover 
all funds received under the project (parent and AF). The formats and contents of the financial progress reports 
are designed into the FMIS.  
 
76. 
External Auditing. Consistent with audit arrangement for the Parent Project, the Office of the Auditor 
General has the constitutional responsibility to carry out independent audit of the project. The SNHCP AF will 
continue to support the engagement of an external audit technical assistance to work with the staff of the Office 
of the Auditor General to undertake the project audit, alongside other projects implemented through country 
systems.23 The audited project annual financial statements, management letters, together with any additional 
required information, will be submitted to the World Bank within six months after the end of the financial year. 
The audits shall be in conformity with the World Bank’s audit requirements and in accordance with internationally 
recognized auditing standards. The respective Office of the Auditor General will express an opinion on the 
Financial Statements in compliance with International Standards for Supreme Audit Institutions, and prepare a 
Management Letter giving observations and comments, and providing recommendations for improvements in 
accounting records, systems, controls, and compliance with financial covenants in the financing agreement. 
 
77. 
The World Bank will be undertaking FM implementation support review extended to include project-
wide cash transfer payments and related reconciliations, as well as the TPM review reports. The control 
procedures applicable to the existing beneficiaries will be continued. 
 
78. 
Retroactive financing. The project may finance an amount of up to US$14 million equivalent of the grant 
amount under retroactive financing to WFP for the cash delivery under the SNHCP AF, as needed, to ensure 
smooth delivery of cash assistance without delays from June 2021 onwards. Retroactive financing may only be 
provided when: (a) the activities financed by retroactive financing are related to the PDO and are included in the 
Project description; (b) the payments are for items procured in accordance with the applicable World Bank 
procurement rules; (c) the payments are made on or after June 1, 2021 and prior to the expected date of the 
signing of the legal agreements for the Grant Agreement; and (d) retroactive financing will only apply if the project 
is approved by the World Bank’s Board of Executive Directors.  
 
 
22 As shall be issued and adopted to replace the EAFS Manual, the COPAMs developed with the support of the project.  
23 Given the high-country risks, specific attention will be focused on the International Standards on Auditing (ISA 800) - Auditor’s Report on 
Special Purpose Audit Engagements as necessary. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 49 
 
D. Procurement  
 
79. 
The existing procurement implementation arrangement of the Parent Project will be maintained and 
strengthened under the proposed AF. The MoLSA PIU is already staffed with a Procurement Specialist, whose 
performance has been satisfactory. The same PIU and Procurement Specialist will be responsible for the 
implementation of the procurement activities under AF. Procurement for the SNHCP AF will continue be carried 
out in accordance with the requirements in the Procurement Regulations for Borrowers under IPF: Goods, Works, 
Non-Consulting Services and Consulting Services dated July 1, 2016 (revised November 2017, August 2018 and 
November 2020). However, as the PIU still has limited experience of using World Bank Procurement Regulations, 
albeit growing, the capacity of the existing staff will continue to be strengthened under the AF to mitigate this 
risk. The Project Procurement Strategy for Development and the procurement plan will be updated in case of 
additional procurement. The WBG’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system will continue 
to be used under AF to prepare, clear and update procurement plan and conduct all procurement transactions for 
the project. Staff of the PIU have been trained in using STEP. 
 
80. 
Advance contracting and retroactive financing. The World Bank has agreed with MoLSA to undertake the 
necessary preparatory work to pre-position itself and be ready to start implementation immediately after the 
proposed AF becomes effective. The procurement for all contracts to be considered for retroactive financing 
under project shall be consistent with the requirements in the Procurement Regulations for Borrowers under IPF: 
Goods, Works, Non-Consulting Services and Consulting Services dated July 1, 2016 (revised November 2017, 
August 2018 and November 2020). MoLSA will however undertake all procurement at its own risk and any World 
Bank concurrence on the procedures, documentation, or proposal of award of contract will not commit the World 
Bank to finance the procurements in question, should the project not be approved by the World Bank’s Executive 
Board of Directors. For all the contracts signed, including operations costs, reimbursement by the World Bank for 
costs incurred under the project before the signing of the SNHCP AF Financing Agreement, as part of retroactive 
financing, shall not exceed the agreed ceiling in the Financing Agreement. 
 
E. Legal Operational Policies 
 
. 
 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
No 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 
No 
.
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 49 
 
F. Environmental and Social  
 
81. 
While the environmental and social risks of the proposed activities under the AF are Substantial, 
established mitigation measures mean that the impacts are expected to be minimal. As project activities, 
geographical scope and implementation arrangements remain unchanged, the risk mitigation measures of the 
Parent Project will apply to the proposed AF. These includes the core social risk management instruments 
currently under implementation under the Parent Project, namely the Social Management Plan, GBV Action Plan, 
Security Management Plan, and Labor Management Procedures. The Environmental and Social Review Summary 
(ESRS) has been updated to detail the social risk mitigation measures to be adopted by the AF, including 
environmental and social performance of the Parent Project and lessons learnt, and has been disclosed in-country 
on May 3, 2021 and on the World Bank external website on May 5, 2021. The Stakeholders Engagement Plan and 
the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan have also been updated and disclosed in-country on May 3, 2021 
and on the World Bank external website on May 5, 2021. The amendments to the Standard Output Agreement 
between MoLSA and WFP will reflect the E&S framework provisions similar and consistent with the Parent Project. 
 
82. 
The proposed AF will continue to use the GRM that has been implemented under the parent SNHCP. 
The parent SNHCP is delivering cash transfers using WFP's established systems, including its GRM system, which 
has been assessed to be adequate by the World Bank during project appraisal. Enhancements have been made to 
the GRM, particularly in relation to GBV issues, following advice provided by the World Bank. Additionally, the PIU 
has recruited a GRM/Social Risk Management Specialist and a Labor GRM Specialist who are coordinating with 
the WFP GRM staff and are responsible for providing oversight and handling of broader project related grievances 
and complaints and specific labor related grievances for all project workers, respectively. The Parent Project is 
also supporting the FGS to develop social accountability mechanisms, including participatory citizen engagement 
and the GRM, supported by UNICEF under the parent SNHCP Component 2.  
 
83. 
A free GRM hotline has been set up and staffed with adequate and trained WFP personnel whereby 
beneficiaries and community members (or anyone else) can submit complaints and grievances. Additionally, a 
GRM Call Center with a free hotline has been created exclusively for labor grievance reporting and is managed by 
the MoLSA Labor GRM Specialist and the GRM Specialist. Beneficiary program cards include instructions and 
numbers to call for information and/or complaints, which are being provided to all beneficiaries even under the 
shift to mobile money payment mechanism.  
 
84. 
The SNHCP GRM is operational and is assessed to be functioning satisfactorily. As of March 2021, 5,355 
complaints were received through the WFP GRM, of which 5,351 cases were successfully closed, with only four 
cases that remained open at the time of reporting. Majority of these cases (5,333) were categorized as “residual” 
cases, as they related to queries regarding project implementation processes and cash entitlements. Ninety-nine 
percent of the cases were closed within less than a month, with most of them being addressed within days. To 
date, there has been one incident of a serious grievance recorded involving fraudulent calls to seven beneficiaries 
in Puntland unlawfully requesting them to send the cash transfer back as it was allegedly the wrong amount. Only 
one beneficiary was impacted as s/he returned the transfer. WFP identified the incident and reported it to MoLSA 
and the World Bank immediately. Following, WFP enhanced its communication with beneficiaries to make 
beneficiaries aware of potential frauds and scams involving the cash transfer and is working with the mobile 
money provider to establish measures to effectively respond to such risks in the future. An action plan has been 
developed, accordingly. Consequently, no other similar incidents have taken place. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 49 
 
V. 
WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS 
 
85. 
Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB) 
supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the WB’s 
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to 
address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the 
WB’s independent Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of WB 
non-compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have 
been brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to 
respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate Grievance Redress Service 
(GRS), please visit http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-
service. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit 
www.inspectionpanel.org 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 49 
 
 
     
 
VI    SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES 
 
 
Changed 
Not Changed 
Results Framework 
  ✔ 
   
Components and Cost 
  ✔ 
   
Loan Closing Date(s) 
  ✔ 
   
Implementing Agency 
     
✔ 
Project's Development Objectives 
     
✔ 
Cancellations Proposed 
     
✔ 
Reallocation between Disbursement Categories 
     
✔ 
Disbursements Arrangements 
     
✔ 
Legal Covenants 
     
✔ 
Institutional Arrangements 
     
✔ 
Financial Management 
     
✔ 
Procurement 
     
✔ 
Other Change(s) 
     
✔ 
 
 
VII   DETAILED CHANGE(S) 
   
COMPONENTS 
Current Component Name 
Current Cost 
(US$, millions) 
Action 
Proposed Component 
Name 
Proposed Cost (US$, 
millions) 
Nutrition-linked 
Unconditional Cash 
Transfers 
53.00 Revised 
Nutrition-linked 
Unconditional Cash 
Transfers 
161.00 
Delivery Systems and 
Institutional Capacity 
Building 
6.00 No Change 
Delivery Systems and 
Institutional Capacity 
Building 
6.00 
Project Management, 
Monitoring and Evaluation, 
and Knowledge 
Management 
6.00 Revised 
Project Management, 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation, and 
Knowledge 
8.00 
 
The World Bank 
 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Additional Financing (P176368) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 49 
 
Management 
TOTAL 
  65.00  
 
 175.00 
 
 
LOAN CLOSING DATE(S) 
Ln/Cr/Tf 
Status 
Original Closing 
 
Current 
Closing(s)  
 
Proposed  
Closing  
 
Proposed Deadline 
for Withdrawal 
Applications 
IDA-D5100 
Effective 
31-Aug-2022 
31-Aug-2022 
31-Aug-2023 
31-Dec-2023 
     
 Expected Disbursements (in US$) 
 DISBURSTBL 
Fiscal Year 
Annual 
Cumulative 
2020 
22,168,446.00 
22,168,446.00 
2021 
42,831,552.00 
64,999,998.00 
2022 
58,000,000.00 
122,999,998.00 
2023 
52,000,000.00 
174,999,998.00 
2024 
0.00 
174,999,998.00 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
Risk Category 
Latest ISR Rating 
Current Rating 
 
Political and Governance 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
Macroeconomic 
⚫ Moderate 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Moderate 
 
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and 
Sustainability 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Fiduciary 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
Environment and Social 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Stakeholders 
⚫ Moderate 
⚫ Moderate 
 
Other 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Overall 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
 
Th