 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD4863  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT 
 
ON A 
PROPOSED GRANT 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 18.6 MILLION 
(US$25.0 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
AND A 
PROPOSED GRANT 
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$2.0 MILLION 
FROM EARLY LEARNING PARTNERSHIP MULTI DONOR TRUST FUND 
 
AND A 
PROPOSED GRANT 
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$25.0 MILLION 
FROM SOMALIA MULTI PARTNER FUND  
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA  
 
FOR A 
 
SOMALIA EMPOWERING WOMEN THROUGH EDUCATION AND SKILLS "RAJO KAABA" 
PROJECT 
 
June 3, 2022 
Education Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
 
  
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective April 30, 2022) 
 
Currency Unit =   United States Dollar (US$) 
SDR 0.74 = US$1 
US$1.35 = SDR 1 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
AGES 
Adolescent Girls’ Education in Somalia 
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
EHCD 
Education for Human Capital Development 
EMIS 
Education Management and Information System 
ESA 
Education Sector Analysis 
ESC 
Education Sector Coordination Committee 
ESCP 
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan 
ESF 
Environmental and Social Framework 
ESSP 
Education Sector Strategic Plan 
FCDO 
Foreign, Commonwealth, and Development Office 
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 
FGM 
Female Genital Mutilation 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMS 
Federal Member States 
GBV 
Gender-Based Violence 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEMS 
Geo-Enabled Initiative for Monitoring and Supervision 
GER 
Gross Enrollment Rate 
GPE 
Global Partnership for Education 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service 
HEI 
Higher Education Institution 
IDP 
Internally Displaced Person 
IFR 
Interim Financial Report 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MoECHE 
Ministry of Education, Culture, and Higher Education 
MOU 
Memorandum of Understanding 
MPF 
Multi-Partner Fund 
NAPA 
National Adaptation Program of Action 
NEET 
Not in Education, Employment, or Training 
NFE 
Non-Formal Education 
NGO 
Non-governmental Organization 
NPV 
Net Present Value 
PAD 
Project Appraisal Document 
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
PFM 
Public Financial Management 
PIP 
Program Implementing Partner 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PMU 
Project Management Unit 
POM 
Project Operations Manual 
PP 
Procurement Plan 
 
 
 
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development 
SDF 
Skills Development Fund 
SOE 
Statement of Expenditure 
SEA/SH 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment 
SEP 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
TVET 
Technical and Vocational Education and Training  
UCS 
Use of Country Systems 
UK 
United Kingdom 
WBG 
World Bank Group 
WDC 
Women’s Development Center 
WG-SS 
Washington Group Short Set 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Hafez M. H. Ghanem 
Country Director: Keith E. Hansen 
Regional Director: Amit Dar 
Practice Manager: Muna Salih Meky 
Task Team Leaders: Shawn Michael Powers, Amanda Epstein Devercelli 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... 1 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 7 
A. Country Context................................................................................................................................ 7 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................... 8 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ............................................................................................. 14 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 15 
A. Project Development Objective ..................................................................................................... 15 
B. Project Components ....................................................................................................................... 15 
C. Project Beneficiaries ....................................................................................................................... 21 
D. Results Chain .................................................................................................................................. 22 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners ................................................................... 23 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design .................................................................... 24 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................ 25 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 25 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements......................................................................... 25 
C. Sustainability ................................................................................................................................... 26 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 27 
A. Technical and Economic Analysis ................................................................................................... 27 
B. Fiduciary .......................................................................................................................................... 28 
C. Legal Operational Policies ............................................................................................................... 30 
D. Environmental and Social ............................................................................................................... 31 
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES ..................................................................................... 33 
VI. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 33 
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 37 
ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan .......................................... 48 
ANNEX 2: Climate Co-Benefits Description .................................................................... 59 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
   
Page 1 of 65 
 
     
DATASHEET 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 
 BASIC INFO TABLE 
Country(ies) 
Project Name 
Somalia 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
P176898 
Investment Project 
Financing 
High 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component  (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict  
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Enhanced Implementation Support (HEIS) 
 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
27-Jun-2022 
30-Jun-2027 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
No 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To improve literacy and numeracy skills of women in selected areas and to prepare women for leadership roles. 
 
Components 
 
Component Name  
Cost (US$, millions) 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 65 
 
Skills for Life and Labor Market Success  
  25.00 
 
Higher Skills Development for Women’s Leadership  
  20.00 
 
Technical Assistance and Project Management  
   7.00 
 
 
Organizations 
 
Borrower:  
 Federal Republic of Somalia  
Implementing Agency: 
 Ministry of Education, Culture and Higher Education, Federal Republic of 
Somalia  
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
Total Project Cost 
52.00 
Total Financing 
52.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
25.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILS-NewFinEnh1 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
25.00 
          IDA Grant 
25.00 
Non-World Bank Group Financing 
     Trust Funds 
27.00 
          Early Learning Partnership 
2.00 
          Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
25.00 
 
  
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Guarantee Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
   0.00 
  25.00 
   0.00 
  25.00 
National PBA 
   0.00 
  25.00 
   0.00 
  25.00 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 65 
 
Total 
   0.00 
  25.00 
   0.00 
  25.00 
 
 
 
Expected Disbursements (in US$, Millions) 
 
WB Fiscal Year   
 
 
 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
2027 
2028 
Annual 
 
 
 
   0.00 
   1.85 
   1.97 
   2.79 
   3.70 
   5.42 
   5.84 
Cumulative 
 
 
 
   0.00 
   1.85 
   3.82 
   6.61 
  10.31 
  15.73 
  21.57 
  
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Education 
 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
⚫ High 
2. Macroeconomic 
⚫ Substantial 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ Moderate 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ Moderate 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
⚫ Substantial 
6. Fiduciary 
⚫ High 
7. Environment and Social 
⚫ High 
8. Stakeholders 
⚫ Substantial 
9. Other 
 
10. Overall 
⚫ Substantial 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 65 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?  
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
  
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
  
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
Legal Covenants 
  
 Sections and Description 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 65 
 
Section I.A.1 of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
Recipient to enter into a Subsidiary Agreement with Somaliland 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.B.2 of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
Recipient to maintain throughout the Project (i) a Project Steering Committee, (ii) a Project Management Unit, and 
(iii)  an External Assistance Fiduciary Section unit 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.C.1 of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
Recipient to prepare a Project Operations Manual (POM), and implement the Project in accordance with the POM 
and the comprehensive operation and accounting procedures manual (COAP) 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.D of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
Recipient to prepare and furnish to the Association no later than October 31st of each year an annual work plan 
and budget in accordance with the POM 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Section I.E.7 of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement: 
Recipient to recruit, no later than three months from the Effective Date a certified security management firm. 
 
 
 
 
Conditions 
  
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
Trust Funds, IBRD/IDA 
Article 4.01 (a) The SMPF Grant Agreement and the ELP Grant 
Agreement have been executed and delivered and all conditions 
precedent to their  effectiveness or to the right of the Recipient to 
make withdrawals under them (other than the effectiveness of this 
Agreement) have been fulfilled. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
Trust Funds, IBRD/IDA 
Article 4.01 (b) The POM has been adopted, in form and substance 
satisfactory to the Association. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
Trust Funds, IBRD/IDA 
Article 4.01 (c) The Recipient has prepared, adopted and disclosed 
the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), the Labor Management 
Procedures (LMP), and the Security Management Framework 
(SMF), in a manner and substance acceptable to the Association. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Disbursement 
Trust Funds, IBRD/IDA 
Under Category (3) until the following measures, outlined in the 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 65 
 
ESCP, have been completed in form and substance satisfactory to 
the Association: (i) an ESMP for the construction phase has been 
adopted and publicly disclosed by the Recipient and cleared by the 
Association, (ii) the SEAH Prevention and Response Action Plan has 
been adopted and publicly disclosed by the Recipient and cleared 
by the Association; (iii) an area-specific Security Management Plan 
has been adopted by the Recipient and cleared by the Association; 
(iv) Resettlement Action Plan (RAPs) and land agreements 
consistent with the requirements of the RAPs been adopted and 
publicly disclosed by the Recipient and cleared by the Association; 
and (v) a functioning, trusted and accessible Project GRM is in place, 
in line with the SEP. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Disbursement 
Trust Funds, IBRD/IDA 
Under Category (5) until Somaliland has: (i) executed the 
Somaliland Subsidiary Agreement setting forth implementation 
arrangements for Somaliland’s Respective Activities under the 
Project (including the flow of funds out of the Grant proceeds), and 
all Somaliland’s internal requirements for the agreement to be 
binding upon Somaliland in accordance with its terms have been 
duly obtained/secured; (ii) prepared and formally adopted a Project 
operation manual for its activities under the Project; (iii) established 
the institutional arrangements set forth in the forgoing manual, as 
shall be required to carrying out said Activities, in a manner and 
substance satisfactory to the Association, and (iv) completed the 
following measures, outlined in the ESCP, in form and substance 
satisfactory to the Association: (A) an ESMP for the construction 
phase has been adopted and publicly disclosed by the Recipient and 
cleared by the Association, (B) the SEAH Prevention and Response 
Action Plan has been adopted and publicly disclosed by the 
Recipient and cleared by the Association; (C) an area-specific 
Security Management Plan has been adopted and cleared by the 
Association; (D) Resettlement Action Plan (RAPs) and land 
agreements consistent with the requirements of the RAPs been 
adopted and publicly disclosed by the Recipient and cleared by the 
Association; and (E) a functioning, trusted and accessible Project 
GRM is in place, in line with the SEP. 
 
 
    
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 65 
 
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
 
A. Country Context 
 
1. 
Somalia is transitioning from a period of prolonged conflict and in recent years has made 
important strides in building core economic institutions, improving security, and strengthening its still-
fragile political consensus. In 2012, Somalia adopted a new constitution and elected a new federal 
parliament and president, and in 2017, the country completed its first national electoral process since the 
transition.  The government has appointed new leaders to key posts and finalized regulations to 
strengthen capacity to monitor financial transactions, including potential terrorism financing. New 
payment system platforms were deployed in 2020, and the Central Bank of Somalia is preparing to 
introduce a new national currency to pave the way for financial inclusion of the poor and strengthen the 
supervision over the financial sector.  In May 2022, Somalia successfully concluded a previously delayed 
election process.  Political leaders had committed to a 30 percent quota for women in parliament. In the 
2022 elections, 20 percent of parliamentary seats were secured by women, and the Federal Government 
of Somalia (FGS) parliament elected the first-ever female deputy speaker of the Lower House. 
2. 
Despite its recent progress, Somalia is confronted with substantial challenges resulting from 
years of instability and underinvestment in human capital, including widespread poverty, low economic 
growth, low fiscal capacity, and fragility. Somalia is one of only four countries on the World Bank’s list of 
fragile and conflict-affected situations rated as a ‘high-intensity’ conflict.  Somalia is one of the poorest 
countries in the world with a per capita gross domestic product (GDP) of US$480. An estimated 69 percent 
of the population live in poverty (below US$1.90 per day according to the most recent 2017 estimate), 
with the poverty rate unlikely to decrease, as the population growth rate has recently been on par with 
the economic growth rate (both 2.9 percent per annum from 2014-2021). The economy benefits 
substantially from foreign remittances, which are estimated to constitute 31.2 percent of GDP (2020).  
Fiscal capacity continues to be low, with a government expenditure-to-GDP ratio of 12.4 percent (2020) 
and a tax-to-GDP ratio of 2.5 percent (2020). These factors all constrain the government’s ability to deliver 
services and respond to these challenges, which were further constrained by political uncertainty related 
to when the federal elections would be concluded, but with elections now completed successfully, hopes 
are high.  Within this evolving context, concern remains that militia-based opposition, known as Al-
Shabaab, may continue to challenge efforts to establish a stable government.   
3. 
The combination of high fertility and improved survival rates mean that education, skills, and 
employment needs will remain high for decades to come. Adolescents and youth ages 10–24 years 
represent 34 percent of the population in Somalia, slightly higher than the Sub-Saharan African average 
(32 percent) and much higher than the global average (24 percent). Moreover, the size of the population 
in this age group is projected to grow from about 5.5 million (2020) to between 12.6 million and 14.8 
million in 2050.1 These demographic changes will require expansion of fiscal space for education (and 
other social services) and improvements in the quality and relevance of education efforts to keep up with 
demand and provide the skills required for economic transformation.  
 
1 Range is due to use of low- or high-fertility scenario. Source: World Bank 2021. Somalia Economic Update. Edition No. 6, June 
2021. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 65 
 
4. 
The challenges facing adolescent girls and women in Somalia are substantial and limit their 
ability to live healthy and productive lives, fulfill their potential, and contribute to the country’s growth. 
More than one quarter (27 percent) of girls and women aged 20–24 years give birth before their 18th 
birthday, which contributes to high overall fertility and increased likelihood of low-birthweight babies and 
stunting in early childhood. Less than one quarter (24 percent) of all women receive four or more 
antenatal care visits, and the maternal mortality ratio is high, at 829 per 100,000 live births, as is the 
under-five mortality rate of 115 per 100,000 live births. Across the country, an estimated 56 percent of 
women ages 15 years or older cannot read, compared to 41 percent of men, and more than half of all 
females ages 15 to 29 years (57 percent) are neither at work nor in school/training, compared to 39 
percent for males.2 Gender-based violence (GBV) is widespread: according to one survey, 36 percent of 
adult women experienced intimate partner violence and 62 percent reported undergoing female genital 
mutilation (FGM)/cutting in their lifetime.3 The cumulative effects of underinvestment, lack of 
opportunity, and violence traps women in a vicious cycle of under-empowerment that affects their 
capacity to participate in society, engage in productive employment, and support their families. 
5. 
With the right investments in its people—particularly in educating girls and women—Somalia 
has the opportunity to capture a demographic dividend. Despite current low levels of literacy and access 
to education, investment in Somalia’s youthful population could yield a high return, especially if girls and 
women who have been left behind by the formal education system could benefit from new opportunities. 
Timely and effective investments in human capital for girls and women can also help reduce the 
intergenerational transmission of poverty. International evidence from a range of contexts confirms that 
increasing girls’ and women’s access to education and earning potential will reduce fertility levels and 
improve women’s and children’s outcomes through multiple channels, including increased autonomy and 
bargaining power in family formation, greater earning power and improved status, and increased child 
survival and investments in children’s health and education. Boosting women’s economic empowerment 
is essential to achieve economic growth, shared prosperity, and social stability in Somalia and to meet the 
current government objectives set out in the Somalia National Development Plan (2020–2024).  
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
6. 
Somalia is rebuilding its education system. Though previously high functioning, Somalia’s 
education system was decimated during the civil war as infrastructure was destroyed and teachers and 
students abandoned the educational process. Somalia’s current education system emerged in 2012 with 
the establishment of the FGS and the provisional constitution guaranteeing free primary and secondary 
education as a basic right in 2012. While the fragile context of Somalia presents numerous challenges for 
education service delivery, the rebuilding of the education system offers opportunities to mitigate some 
of the effects of violence and fragility. Though not fully codified in law, the Federal Government’s Ministry 
of Education, Culture, and Higher Education (MoECHE) is responsible for the overall guidance and 
administration of education, while Somalia’s FMS are responsible for policy implementation and service 
delivery. 
 
2 World Bank Group. 2019. Somali Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment: Findings from Wave 2 of the Somali High Frequency 
Survey. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
3 Wirtz AL, Perrin NA, Desgroppes A, et al. 2018. Lifetime prevalence, correlates and health consequences of gender-based 
violence victimisation and perpetration among men and women in Somalia. BMJ Global Health 2018;3:e000773. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 65 
 
7. 
There is an emerging agreement regarding the roles and responsibilities of the FGS and member 
state governments. The federal system includes five federal member states (FMS)—Galmudug, 
Hirshabelle, Jubbaland, Puntland and South West—and the federally administered Banadir 
Administration. Although not internationally recognized, Somaliland declared independence in 1991 and 
does not participate in the federal system. Since 1991, Somaliland has undergone a relatively successful 
process of post-conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction with three successful elections since 2002. The 
relative peace and stability in Somaliland have given the government an opportunity to invest in basic 
service delivery, including education.  
8. 
Somalia’s federal and state governments have made strides in education policy and program 
development. Notable achievements include enactment of a new Basic Education Act that regulates the 
provision of basic and adult education in the country; engagement with development partners since 2012 
on a series of Education Sector Strategic Plans (ESSPs), with a new ESSP currently under development 
(2022-2026); and the adoption of the country’s new harmonized competency-based curriculum. The 
MoECHE has brought together technical and vocational education and training (TVET) and non-formal 
education (NFE) in a consolidated department, delineated the roles and responsibilities of the MoECHE 
and the Ministry of Labor in the skills development space through a memorandum of understanding 
(MOU), and finalized a unified national education policy framework through a signed MOU with the FMS. 
The recently approved US$40 million IDA-financed Education for Human Capital Development (EHCD) 
Project (P172434) is also a significant achievement given that it will be Somalia’s first major government-
executed education project. 
9. 
Despite this progress, access to education remains low. The primary gross enrollment rate (GER) 
is estimated to be 20 percent, with approximately 3 million primary-aged children (ages 5–14 years) out 
of school, and the secondary GER is estimated at 14 percent. An estimated 44 percent of youth (ages 15–
24 years) in Somalia are not in education, employment, or training (NEET), according to the 2019 Somalia 
Labor Force Survey.4 The NEET rate is particularly high for young women: 50 percent of all females ages 
15–24 years were neither at work nor in school/training, compared to 39 percent for males.  
Girls’ and Women’s Education in Somalia 
10. 
Women’s basic skills, such as literacy and numeracy, are low both in absolute terms and relative 
to men in Somalia. Nationwide, an estimated 56 percent of women ages 15 years or older cannot read 
compared to 41 percent of men (Figure 1a). In recent years, Somalia has made progress in getting more 
girls in school: the share of women and girls from ages 10 to 19 years without any formal education is half 
that of women over age 35 (Figure 1b). This gradual improvement in access to basic education is a 
substantial achievement against a backdrop of crisis. Despite this progress, more than 40 percent of girls 
remain excluded even in the youngest cohort. While women’s education attainment and literacy are lower 
than men’s across the board, there are also unequal outcomes across different groups of women: 
approximately 72 percent of women ages 25 years or older, who live in rural areas, have never attended 
formal schooling, compared to 59 percent in urban areas. For women who are nomads or in internally 
 
4 Somalia National Bureau of Statistics. 2019. Somalia Labor Force Survey Report. https://www.nbs.gov.so/the-labour-force-
survey-report-2019/ 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 65 
 
displaced person (IDP) settlements, this percentage reaches 83 percent. Though the national literacy rate 
for women is 44 percent, for rural women it is 35 percent, and among nomadic women it is 10 percent.  
Figure 1. Key Education Indicators Disaggregated by Gender in Somalia 
(a) Literacy Rates by Gender and Geography, Somalia 
(b) Population without Access to Formal Education 
by Gender, Somalia 
Source: Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Study (World Bank 2019). 
11. 
Girls and women face many challenges in accessing education. These include poverty, distance 
from home to school, preferential treatment of males, and other social norms that include pressure to 
marry at a young age and household chores and care responsibilities for younger siblings.5 The scarcity of 
female role models in leadership positions and at higher levels of education, coupled with beliefs that only 
men should continue to advanced levels of education, likely affect women’s persistence in the education 
system.6 The number of girls and women who never benefitted from basic education in the first place will 
remain high without concerted efforts to provide second chance or NFE opportunities.7 Gender-specific 
barriers intersect with other sources of exclusion, including geographic location, socioeconomic class, and 
disability status. While the provisional constitution of Somalia and FGS policies guarantee access to 
education for persons with disabilities, the Somalia Education Sector Analysis (ESA) 2022 notes that 
school-age children with disabilities, and especially girls with disabilities, are disproportionately excluded 
from education. Underlying challenges cited by the ESA include a lack of data on the prevalence of 
disability, unfavorable community attitudes, and no teacher training on supporting learners with 
disabilities.8 
 
5 Federal Government of Somalia. 2022. Somalia Education Sector Analysis. Dakar: IIEP-UNESCO. 
6 Jama, A. and G.S. Barre. 2019. Understanding the Barriers to Girls´ and Women´s Access to Higher Education in Puntland, 
Somalia. London: Overseas Development Institute. 
7 Second chance education targets individuals who never attended school, left school before completing the level (e.g., primary 
or secondary) in which they were enrolled, or left before obtaining the level needed for a desired occupation or further study. 
The objective of second chance education is to provide either missing skills which are required for the labor market, 
entrepreneurship or daily life, or to afford beneficiaries an opportunity to rejoin a formal education path by attaining the 
equivalent of the level of education they did not complete. 
8 
Federal 
Government 
of 
Somalia. 
2022. 
Somalia 
Education 
Sector 
Analysis. 
Dakar: 
IIEP-UNESCO. 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Mogadishu
Other
urban
Rural
IDPs in
settlements
Nomads
% of population aged 15 or more
Women
Men
Overall average
20
40
60
80
100
10 - 14 Years
15 - 19 Years
20 - 24 Years
25 - 29 Years
30 - 34 Years
35 - 39 Years
40 - 44 Years
45 - 49 Years
50 - 54 Years
55+
% of population 
Age group 
Women
Men
Overall average
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 65 
 
12. 
Several barriers, in addition to low educational attainment, affect women’s economic 
engagement.9 Overall, women’s labor force participation is low at 20 percent, compared to 58 percent 
for men. The labor market is segregated by gender, with women mostly in lower-income activities. 
Women account for 60 percent of owners of micro businesses, which are characterized as informal, 
irregular, and of low value. According to the 2019 Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Study 2019, ’family 
and household care’ is the most cited reason for inactivity, nearing 60 percent for most subgroups of 
women. These data indicate that any efforts to boost women’s economic empowerment will have to 
address household and childcare responsibilities, which constrain women’s ability to work outside the 
home or participate in education or other opportunities. Other barriers include (a) limited opportunities 
for acquiring vocational and business skills; (b) societal norms and dynamics that limit women’s 
meaningful participation in private enterprises and contribute to a hostile work environment; (c) women’s 
lack of control over critical resources including land, financial resources, and other inputs; (d) insufficient 
market research on viable opportunities; and (e) a lack of access to formal networks to provide business 
guidance. While the World Bank and partners are working together with the Federal Government of 
Somalia to facilitate women’s entry into the labor market and self-employment, there is a need to scale 
up successful approaches to help more women overcome these barriers. 
13. 
Somali women stakeholders and activists were consulted during project identification regarding 
issues of labor market engagement.10 When asked to what degree basic skills affect women’s well-being 
and success, the participants agreed that it is a key priority for women to have basic reading, writing, and 
arithmetic skills. They stressed the close correlation between a command of these basic skills and the 
capacity to reach financial independence, which they identified as the main driver of self-confidence. 
These discussions echoed the findings in the Poverty and Vulnerability Survey from 2019, with participants 
suggesting that women’s limited financial independence, the absence of childcare for working women, 
and excessive responsibilities for women in the household are key constraints. Participants noted that 
these challenges are even more severe for women with disabilities, who have even less access than men 
with disabilities to available opportunities. These women also highlighted the substantial security and 
safety concerns that women face in the labor market, emphasizing widespread experiences of personal 
harassment, abuse, and toxic workplace cultures. These activists strongly expressed that women need to 
be educated on their legal rights and for many more opportunities to be created for women leaders. 
Participants also suggested that public campaigns, including through social media, should be expanded to 
promote women’s participation in further education and the workforce.  
14. 
Promising interventions to boost women’s skills and ability to engage in productive 
employment exist in Somalia. These include second chance education for girls and women who did not 
complete formal schooling, training for job-relevant skills, and investments in higher education to build 
leadership capacity and create aspirational pathways for young women. To maximize the potential of 
 
http://www.iiep.unesco.org/en/publication/education-sector-analysis-federal-government-somalia-assessing-opportunities-
rebuilding 
9World 
Bank 
2019. 
Somalia 
Poverty 
and 
Vulnerability 
Study 
2019. 
Washington, 
DC: 
World 
Bank. 
https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/32323. 
10 Consultations included representatives from a diverse group of stakeholders, including the Disability Aid Foundation; MCA-
Network/MVTC Network of marginalized and vulnerable groups; Save the Children; Somalia Non-state Actors (SONSA); Somalia 
Vulnerable Actors; Gaari Dumar; Hano Academy; Kaafiya; Hiigso; iRise Hub; and microfinance initiatives such as Kim’s, Awood, 
and Fursad Abuur.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 65 
 
these interventions, more work is required to both increase access and improve coherence and quality 
across existing interventions.  
Second Chance Education and Skills Training  
15. 
The current second chance initiatives targeting adolescent girls and young women demonstrate 
operational value but are limited in ambition and are donor driven. The existing programs in Somalia 
have been supported by major funders, including the United Kingdom (UK), the United States (US), and 
the European Union (EU), and with the support of international and local implementation partners. These 
programs provide primary- and secondary-level second chance education targeted to girls or more 
broadly to children from pastoralist communities, minority groups, and others who have been left behind. 
The UK-financed Adolescent Girls’ Education in Somalia (AGES) Project provides NFE with key life skills in 
three FMS. The AGES Project demonstrates the capacity for second chance programs to be inclusive of 
persons with disabilities, even in low-resource settings: the program identifies participants with 
disabilities using the Washington Group Short Set (WG-SS) of questions and makes accommodations for 
them to participate on equal terms with other beneficiaries. Despite the value of these programs 
individually, they are designed and implemented by external partners outside an integrated framework 
and are not contributing to a sustainable second chance system. 
16. 
A successful second chance education system will require investment to build the system over 
time and address current deficits. Challenges facing second chance programs and policy reform efforts 
include low access, inadequate financing, insufficient data, and low capacity of staff at federal and state 
levels. Most services are provided by nongovernmental institutions, with little coordination and oversight 
and a lack of basic information on service provision and outcomes. The MoECHE has been taking on an 
increasingly important role over the last several years and a dedicated department and unit that will 
oversee all activity relating to the provision of NFE, as well as adult education, is now in place at the federal 
and state levels. Puntland and Somaliland have developed their own NFE policies and curriculum 
implementation guidelines.  
17. 
In addition to literacy and numeracy, job-relevant skills are critical for women’s successful 
engagement in the labor market and self-employment. Somalia’s skills sector is currently small and donor 
driven. There is no reliable and consistently updated source of key data, including on the outcomes of 
program graduates; gender gaps in enrollment, completion, and subject choice; and the skills needs of 
the formal and informal economy. Available data suggest that at least 129 skills training centers have been 
established around the country, though a lack of government financing leaves institutions largely 
dependent on donor funding. Public TVET institutions’ operations are limited and often interrupted when 
funding is unavailable, as salaries are typically funded on an ad hoc basis through donor project financing. 
As a result, as few as 13,500 people may be enrolled in public skills training programs nationwide.11 More 
than 650,000 14–17-year-olds are out of school and more than 150,000 youth have completed either 
primary education or NFE but are not in further education or training, suggesting a substantial unmet 
need for skilling opportunities. In practice, most Somalis learn market-relevant skills informally, for 
example, in family-run farming or fishing businesses or through other close contacts. There is a high 
degree of gender segregation into traditionally male and female fields, as well as strong cultural 
 
11 Federal Government of Somalia, Administrative data, MoECHE. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 65 
 
associations between traditional clans and specific professions, reducing the social space for people to 
pursue opportunities in non-stereotypical sectors.  
 
Higher Education 
18. 
After the collapse of the central government in 1991, the entire higher education sub-sector 
was destroyed. Destruction of the sector went far beyond the deterioration of physical infrastructure. It 
is estimated that more than 80 percent of the educated elite left the country from 1991 to 2008.12 This 
extended period of insecurity and instability has robbed a generation of the chance to attend formal 
education and to build a pipeline to higher education. In the absence of the central government, local 
communities, Islamic NGOs, and the Somali diaspora have spearheaded efforts to develop the higher 
education sector, even amid conflict. Currently, there are 118 higher education institutions (HEIs) of 
different sizes and capacities functioning across the country, although only 41 are officially recognized by 
the National Commission of Higher Education as of 2021. This exponential growth has happened largely 
without government oversight and quality control.13  
19. 
Women’s access to higher education and leadership opportunities is low, albeit slowly 
improving. Figure 2 illustrates trends like those observed in basic education, with women’s attainment 
slowly improving from older to younger cohorts, with a persistent gender gap that may be starting to be 
reduced. The barriers that prevent girls from accessing education at lower levels – including social norms, 
early marriage and pregnancy, lack of childcare, GBV, and economic constraints – both reduce the pipeline 
of young women prepared for higher education and prevent otherwise prepared women from enrolling. 
Retention of women in higher education remains a significant challenge. Though data are scare, available 
information indicates that women account for approximately 40 percent of the enrollment of first year 
students in higher education, but most of the women who enroll do not complete their studies. Among 
women ages 25–44 years old, about 7 percent have attended higher education, compared to 16 percent 
of men. Better data will be needed to understand the challenges that women face in making the transition 
from secondary to higher education and in persisting through completion of a diploma or degree. Some 
gains have been achieved in women’s participation in political and public decision-making and leadership. 
 
12 Lindley, A. 2008. Transnational Connections and Education in the Somali Context. Journal of Eastern African Studies, 2(3): 401-
414. 
13 The Heritage Institute for Policy Studies. 2013. The State of Higher Education in Somalia: Privatization, Rapid Growth, and the 
Need for Regulation. Mogadishu, Somalia.  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 65 
 
20. 
Somali women have advocated 
for greater political representation and 
inclusion, and in some areas their 
participation has been protected and 
promoted by the introduction of 
initiatives, such as the 30 percent 
women’s quota in Parliament. Of the 
women who have successfully secured 
political positions, few have the formal 
education or technical experience to 
effectively carry out the mandate and 
duties of their leadership positions, 
indicating the need for more advanced 
training for women leaders. 
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
 
21. 
Under the 2018–2022 CPF, the World Bank is intensifying its efforts to advance gender equity 
and address factors of exclusion and marginalization. The Somalia CPF highlights the importance of 
addressing gender disparities and dynamics underpinning exclusion in Somalia, recognizing that it is a key 
pathway to ensuring sustained growth and shared prosperity and that the interaction between increasing 
gender equality for endowments (health and education), economic opportunity, and voice and agency is 
crucial to achieving sustained growth and building resilience. In particular, the project supports Focus Area 
1.3 by helping improve delivery systems for more inclusive social services in NFE and higher education. 
The project complements other World Bank financed projects with gender-focused interventions in 
Somalia, including the Somalia EHCD Project, Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project, and 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship, through Digital Uplift Project 
(P168115) (SCALED-UP) and Additional Financing. 
22. 
The project is aligned with the World Bank’s broader women’s empowerment agenda in Sub-
Saharan Africa and draws on the analytical and operational expertise being developed under the 
Somalia Gender Equity Platform. The platform was designed to help the World Bank engage in dialogue 
with the Somali government and civil society partners to strengthen knowledge and evidence and develop 
interventions to address, and potentially overcome, challenges related to women’s exclusion, limits on 
adolescent girls’ and women’s empowerment and economic engagement, barriers to women's 
entrepreneurship, and GBV. The project is highly relevant to the World Bank’s ‘4Es’ approach 
(empowering women, employing women, enhancing access to reproductive health services, and 
educating girls).14 It is also consistent with the principles of the Sahel Women's Empowerment and 
Demographic Dividends (SWEDD) Project (P150080) and will follow a holistic approach to remove 
different barriers to girls’ and women’s access to education. The project supports multiple pillars of the 
World Bank Group Gender Strategy (FY16-23), including improving human endowments through 
 
14 World Bank. 2019. Africa Human Capital Plan. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/worldbank-africa-human-capital-plan 
Figure 2. Percentage of Somali Population by Age Group Who 
Attended Higher Education  
    Source: Somali Health and Demographic Survey (2020). 
0
4
8
12
16
20
15-19 Years
20-24 Years
25-29 Years
30-34 Years
35-39 Years
40-44 Years
45-49 Years
50-54 Years
55-59 Years
60-64 Years
65+
% of population
Age group
Male
Female
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 65 
 
education for girls and women and enhancing women’s voice and agency by developing female 
leadership.15 Addressing gender disparities is also critical for the consolidation of peace and security in 
conditions of ongoing conflict and instability, which are protracted and pronounced in the Somalia 
context.  
23. 
The project complements other World Bank operations in contributing to getting Somalia’s 
demographic transition started. This project is well aligned with the World Bank’s Human Development 
portfolio, which addresses the various determinants of high fertility and women’s empowerment. 
Complementary projects include the Somalia EHCD Project, which aims to improve girls’ access to basic 
education and learning outcomes; the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project, ‘Baxnaano’ 
(P171346), which provides cash transfers to targeted poor and vulnerable households in selected districts, 
while building a national safety net system; and the Improving Healthcare Services in Somalia Project, 
‘Damal Caafimaad’(P172031), which addresses reproductive and maternal and child health and aims to 
ensure access to basic health services with a strong focus on family planning.  
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
A. Project Development Objective 
PDO Statement 
24. 
The PDO is to improve literacy and numeracy skills of women in selected areas and to prepare 
women for leadership roles. 
PDO Level Indicators 
• 
Beneficiaries advancing at least one level in Somali reading assessment (Number, 
disaggregated by gender and beneficiaries with disabilities) 
• 
Beneficiaries advancing at least one level numeracy assessment (Number, disaggregated by 
gender and beneficiaries with disabilities) 
• 
Female graduates of women’s college and women’s development center (WDC) programs 
in leadership roles (Number, cumulative, disaggregated by disability status) 
B. Project Components 
25. 
Empowerment of women in Somalia is at the center of building a more just, economically 
strong, politically stable, and peaceful country. The project will support the government’s efforts to 
enhance the conditions for women’s empowerment by providing the fundamental skills, qualifications, 
competencies, and mindset needed for women to improve their labor force participation, enhance their 
informal and formal sector job success and self-employment, and expand their leadership roles across all 
sectors of the society. A growing cadre of women who have this preparation for success would enable 
Somalia to walk the path of sustained economic growth and social development; reduce the 
 
15 World Bank Group. 2015. World Bank Group Gender Strategy (FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive 
Growth. World Bank, Washington, DC.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 65 
 
intergenerational transmission of poverty through reduced fertility and greater parental investment per 
child; and change social norms around women’s autonomy and accepted harmful practices such as FGM, 
GBV, and child marriage. 
26. 
The project design recognizes the self-reinforcing dynamics of women’s success across various 
levels of education and will reinforce Somalia’s efforts to build a coherent education system at the 
federal and subnational levels. Acquisition of numeracy and literacy skills both enhance women’s basic 
ability to engage in the world and facilitate access to skilled occupations and entrepreneurship. The 
presence of women leaders has been shown to increase aspirations of parents for their daughters and 
girls’ aspirations for themselves. To build female leadership requires a pipeline of girls and women 
progressing through primary to secondary education and beyond. The project’s comprehensive approach 
to second chance education, skills training, and higher education recognizes the potential for a virtuous 
cycle of women’s success up and down the educational system. The project will draw upon 
implementation lessons from projects in contexts affected by fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV), 
including the importance of simplicity and flexibility in implementation modalities using both government 
and non-state actors for delivery.  
Component 1: Skills for Life and Labor Market Success (US$1 million equivalent IDA grant, US$2 million 
Early Learning Partnership Multi Donor Trust Fund grant, US$22 million Somalia Multi Partner Fund 
grant) 
27. 
The objective of the first component is to support adolescent girls and women16 to acquire basic 
literacy and numeracy skills, cross-cutting socioemotional and life skills, and basic vocational skills to 
improve their livelihoods. Given the low levels of literacy and numeracy in the target population, the 
component will focus on improving these foundational skills and basic livelihood skills, which are 
prerequisites to higher-level employment or self-employment skills in specific sectors. This component 
addresses key demand- and supply-side constraints in service delivery, using a competitive and demand-
driven process to finance different service providers and delivery methods, as appropriate, to the diverse 
regions of the country. The component will be led by the federal MoECHE’s Department of TVET and NFE, 
in collaboration with their equivalents at the FMS level and in Somaliland and the Ministry of Labor.  
28. 
The component will primarily support hiring of Program Implementing Partners (PIPs) to deliver 
skills training. The PIPs will provide nonresidential integrated education and skills training in literacy, 
numeracy, and socioemotional skills (lasting no more than 12 months in duration). Where possible, the 
training will also include training in market-relevant vocational skills.17 Eligible entities may be local and 
international NGOs, public and private TVET centers, and private companies, depending on the type of 
training provided. As appropriate, programs may be delivered using existing school infrastructure during 
afternoons and weekends (that is, outside regular school hours); community learning centers; and/or 
alternative service delivery models, including mobile education and other interactive instruction 
approaches, such as radio. This approach will build on existing service delivery capacity in-country, 
particularly in the first year of project implementation, which is expected to focus on bringing existing 
 
16 Up to 10 percent of beneficiaries in each target district may be disadvantaged boys and men (for example, members of 
marginalized groups such as IDPs or men with disabilities). 
17 A survey of the FMS indicated the following sectors to be priorities: agriculture, livestock, fisheries, childcare, tailoring, beauty, 
and commercial food preparation. Solar technology and other efficient energy sectors are also likely to be prioritized. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 65 
 
models to scale. Standardized quality criteria for approval will ensure that all programs are informed by 
best practices18 and help ensure more cohesion across skills training programs across regions.  
29. 
The main instrument for implementing the scheme will be results-oriented performance 
agreements with the PIPs to (a) provide support to eligible women and men to enroll and undertake 
training; (b) provide additional support to eligible beneficiaries to reduce barriers to attendance, including 
through stipends paid in tranches throughout the progression of the training to incentivize completion;19 
(c) impart high-quality training in foundational skills (numeracy, literacy and life skills, including personal 
initiative, problem solving, and communication) as well as sessions on sexual and reproductive health, 
climate change response, basic digital skills, and vocational skills, where possible, to support productive 
employment; and (d) provide follow-up support for beneficiaries to track their employment status and 
assist in finding sustainable employment opportunities for those students who opt to enter the labor 
market. To ensure inclusion of beneficiaries with disabilities, the PIPs will conduct community outreach 
to engage potential beneficiaries with disabilities, apply the WG-SS disability identification questionnaire 
as part of the intake process, and make appropriate accommodations to ensure universal access using a 
toolkit as part of the performance agreements.  
30. 
The performance agreements will include a set of performance parameters that will be the 
primary basis for financial disbursements by the FGS MoECHE to the PIPs. The performance agreements 
will aim to provide incentives for meeting agreed upon targets in each of the areas identified above. The 
FGS MoECHE will be responsible for managing the call of proposals, while a technical selection committee, 
including FGS and FMS representatives, stakeholders from civil society, and representatives of the private 
sector, will review the proposals and select the PIPs. The selection criteria and application process will be 
further specified in the Project Operations Manual (POM). The FMS will support monitoring and 
implementation of the scheme. An implementing partner will be hired by the FGS MoECHE under the 
supervision of the Project Management Unit (PMU) to operate the logistics of implementing the scheme 
and support the FMS in monitoring implementation. A third-party monitoring agent will be hired to verify 
results before payments to the PIPs.  
31. 
The coverage regions for Component 1 have been identified based on the following criteria: (a) 
two target districts and one alternate district per FMS and Somaliland, (b) demand from regional and 
district officials, (c) accessibility for government supervision, (d) capacity to implement the programs, (e) 
availability of complementary demand-side interventions such as cash transfer programs, and (f) avoiding 
duplication with similar programs, such as the FCDO-financed AGES Project.  
Component 2: Higher Skills Development for Women’s Leadership (US$18 million equivalent IDA grant, 
US$2 million Somalia Multi Partner Fund grant) 
32. 
Through this component, the government of Somalia will expand opportunities for women 
through the establishment of WDCs and take the first steps in creating a consortium of autonomous 
 
18 For example, inclusion of worksite-based training or practicum in the case of skills training and targeting instruction to 
participants’ learning levels and using frequent assessments to improve targeting in the case of literacy and numeracy instruction. 
19 Given high levels of poverty and household and economic demands on beneficiaries, additional support and incentives for 
attendance can include (a) provision of stipends to reduce out-of-pocket costs (for example, transport), (b) childcare services, (c) 
engagement with community and religious leaders, and (d) completion bonuses for girls and women who complete courses and 
pass a test of competency. As part of the completion bonus, participants may receive an energy-efficient green cookstove. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 65 
 
women’s colleges to support a systemwide expansion of women’s higher-level skills and leadership 
development. The component is designed to help Somali girls and women develop the knowledge, 
qualifications, and abilities to serve effectively in high-skilled employment and in leadership roles in 
politics, government, and the world of business. The component will initially use existing institutions to 
implement short courses and other programming to support women’s leadership through WDCs, as well 
as support a feasibility study and implementation plan for a new consortium of women’s colleges. Based 
on the feasibility study and the implementation plan, the component will also support the establishment 
and initial stages of implementation of the new consortium. 
33. 
Digital skills and competencies, as well as piloting of remote delivery options, will feature 
strongly in the curriculum and operations across the consortium of women’s colleges and WDCs. While 
campus-based learning is particularly important for providing an environment conducive and committed 
to the safe and deliberate education of women, digital skills and remote operational elements will also be 
core functions of the women’s colleges. When possible, digital skills and competencies will be built into 
the curriculum in all fields of study. Having learned important lessons from other countries’ capacity to 
continue delivering higher education programs during the COVID-19 pandemic, the women’s colleges will 
be developed with remote delivery considerations built into the planning (including curriculum and 
infrastructure) from the early stages to support resilience in delivery in case of future disruptions. 
Subcomponent 2.1: Establishing Women’s Development Centers (US$7.5 million) 
34. 
The objective of this subcomponent is to establish WDCs to support women’s leadership and 
higher education through a range of accessible programming. These WDCs will serve as administrative 
hosts, offering fee-free physical and virtual safe spaces to support women’s leadership and empowerment 
and offering diverse programming, including mentorship and peer support, technical and professional 
women-centered short courses, special events and opportunities for networking, and foundational 
courses for advancing-higher skills development. Beneficiaries will include women with some level of 
post-secondary education and girls and women needing additional preparation to be ready for higher 
education. Each WDC would develop bridge and remediation interventions, including outreach campaigns 
and programs and courses, which provide up-skilling of girls and women to prepare them for successful 
transitions to higher-level studies. The WDCs will also offer mentorship programs and events and serve as 
vibrant, supportive, and safe spaces for girls and women on campuses.  
35. 
The subcomponent will support the establishment of a competitive grants program to fund 10–
15 WDCs at universities or other government authorized HEIs across the country. The allocation will 
take place through competitive calls for proposals administered by the PMU, with engagement of the 
MoECHE. An Evaluation Committee of recognized international and national experts on women’s 
education, including the Higher Education Commission of Somalia, representatives from civil society and 
the FGS and FMS, and Somaliland will evaluate the submitted proposals based on pre-agreed criteria 
(which will be defined in the POM). Criteria are likely to include (a) the quality of the proposals overall; (b) 
the capacity of the institutions to have the strongest impact on girls/women in their academic community; 
and (c) the sustainability planning embedded in the proposals. The grant for each WDC is expected to be 
up to US$500,000 for use over a period of up to four years, which would cover, among other costs, salaries 
for the subproject leaders and relevant teaching and support service staff; materials and equipment; and 
any minor renovations/infrastructure improvements to house the WDC. These WDCs would fill a critical 
gap in the existing academic environment for targeted support for women—to improve access and, even 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 65 
 
more, progression and successful completion of their studies. By investing in these pilot WDCs, the 
proposed project would nurture the development of tried and tested models for supporting women 
across a variety of institutional types to serve as options for reforms across all HEIs.  
36. 
Technical assistance would be provided (through the PMU) to build capacity in the MoECHE to 
administer the new WDC grant programs. This would include engaging international and national experts 
to assist the MoECHE and PMU to: 
• 
Develop the tender dossier for the WDC grant program (manual on financing programs, call for 
proposals, guide for applicants, manual for selection procedure, and the M&E process); and, 
• 
Undertake a study about the experience of women in Somali universities, to include specific 
questions related to bridging from secondary to higher education, progression barriers in higher 
education, and strengthening the links between the higher education experience of women and 
their labor market outcomes. 
 
Subcomponent 2.2: Developing a Consortium of Autonomous Women’s Colleges (US$12.5 million) 
37. 
The objective of this subcomponent is to support the government to develop a consortium of 
autonomous women’s colleges, chartered to provide a unique learning environment for women in 
Somalia to develop the high-level skills needed to participate fully in the Somalia labor market and serve 
as future leaders in politics, public service, business, education, and civil society. These colleges will 
serve two key strategic goals identified as being of national importance by the FGS: (a) increasing the 
number of women with the high-level skills needed to serve at the highest levels of leadership in Somalia, 
including in the Parliament, where there is a national target already set to reach and maintain 30 percent 
female representation by the next parliamentary election cycle; and (b) expanding opportunities for 
women to hone the academic learning and research skills needed to proceed through increasingly 
advanced levels of post-secondary education, including through Master’s and Doctoral level studies, 
particularly in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) fields. Each established women’s 
college would be independent of any umbrella university and initial implementation would support the 
development of at least two initial campuses in locations that will be identified through the development 
of an inception report.  
38. 
The subcomponent will support the MoECHE and Somaliland and FMS to develop the model for 
the women’s college consortium and individual plans within the FMS and Somaliland. The main activities 
of this subcomponent will include: (a) drafting of an inception report, outlining the benefits of a variety of 
options for the consortium model, to inform the design and implementation plan for the consortium of 
women’s colleges; (b) development of design plans for the consortium model, including charter design 
plans for at least two initial pilot institutions (including options for infrastructure and facilities 
rehabilitation, curriculum tailored to specific local conditions and broader national strategic needs, 
staffing, budgeting, scholarship plans, and enrollment plans); (c) legal establishment of each institution 
and a national Women’s College Board, which would be responsible for governance oversight for the 
entire consortium; (d) implementation of the charter plans to create the legal conditions that establish 
the women’s colleges and the Women’s College Board for sustainable operations; and (e) opening of some 
institutions to begin enrolling students. The inception report will include a template that each FMS could 
use to develop a strategic plan for developing future women’s colleges, including identifying existing 
infrastructure to be converted into the campus for the women’s college, establishing the relevant 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 65 
 
academic curriculum to serve their local/regional needs, and defining a roadmap for implementation that 
would be achievable during and beyond the project implementation timeline. 
Component 3: Technical Assistance and Project Management (US$6 million equivalent IDA grant, 
US$1 million Somalia Multi Partner Fund grant)  
39. 
Component 3 will finance systems strengthening efforts, technical assistance, and project 
management, including (a) development of data systems for the NFE, TVET, and higher education sectors; 
(b) building of capacity to manage NFE more effectively, including through the development of a Skills 
Development Fund (SDF); (c) development of contextually appropriate ways to leverage technology to 
deliver skills and leadership training and monitor and evaluate the system and impact of individual 
interventions; (d) project management; and (e) FGS, FMS, and Somaliland government capacity building. 
40. 
The component will support the development of a robust system for collection and utilization 
of data on NFE, TVET, and higher education, with an emphasis on tracking gender gaps and informing 
the subsequent development of strategic policies and plans. These activities will promote development 
of NFE, TVET, and higher education systems that are more data-driven, more coherent, and better 
integrated with the rest of the education system.  
41. 
The component will also support M&E and use of remote technology to support systems 
strengthening. The component will support tracer studies to collect data on labor market outcomes and 
other outcomes of beneficiaries in both Components 1 and 2 and an impact evaluation of the basic second 
chance program under Component 1. The component will also support the Government of Somalia to 
experiment with technological solutions to improve M&E in a fragile context, leveraging Somalia’s 
relatively high rate of mobile coverage to seek beneficiary feedback and monitor service delivery and 
impact. These systems will help build resilience in the face of potential future disruptions to face-to-face 
learning and build capacity to reach girls and women in remote or unstable areas.  
42. 
Finally, the component will support project implementation and capacity building by 
strengthening the management capacity of the FGS MoECHE staff and the state-, regional-, and district-
level education administrators in targeted districts. Because the current capacity at all administrative 
levels is weak, continuing support will be needed to ensure that project financing is used in a credible 
manner and managed efficiently. This component will therefore further strengthen management 
capacity, and the project coordinator will work closely with the various implementing entities and M&E, 
fiduciary, and environmental and social risks management staff, including to support the establishment 
of the consortium of women’s colleges. The component will also finance technical assistance to explore 
the creation of an SDF to bring cohesion and improve the quality and efficiency of NFE at the FGS and FMS 
levels. This project is aligned with the Somalia EHCD Project and as such, staff and resources will be 
integrated in the existing EHCD PMU, though with separate staff recruited for several key positions. 
Project staff will also be hired at the FMS level to manage activities at that level and regularly supervise 
project activities. The component will provide salary support to key staff, as well as resources for training 
activities and operating costs for project management, monitoring, and training programs; office 
equipment; and furniture. It will also finance the implementation of the GBV prevention and response 
action plan developed for the project, including contracting of a qualified service provider to support safe 
and confidential survivor services. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 65 
 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
43. 
The project is expected to benefit and empower women and girls through enhanced literacy 
and numeracy skills, skills for income generation, skills for leadership, and systems strengthening. 
During implementation, the project is expected to benefit at least 28,500 young women and up to 3,000 
disadvantaged young men aged 15-35 from primarily marginalized and vulnerable populations, including 
IDPs, in a set of target districts across Somalia, including Somaliland (Table 1)20. Under Component 1, the 
project is expected to benefit at least 27,000 young women and up to 3,000 disadvantaged young men. 
Component 1 will directly benefit these beneficiaries through non-formal second chance programs 
focused on functional literacy and numeracy, livelihoods, and sector-specific skills and labor market 
qualifications. Under Component 2, at least 1,500 women will directly benefit from WDCs through short 
courses and mentorship and leadership development opportunities, and the consortium of women’s 
colleges will be established to offer certificate and degree programs. Across components, it is expected 
that at least 10 percent of beneficiaries will be persons with disabilities.  In addition to direct beneficiaries, 
the project is expected to bring substantial benefits for family members of beneficiaries through increased 
family income, increased knowledge to support child development, the multi-generational returns to 
investments in female education (improved child health, nutrition, and education), as well as improved 
air quality from the use of fuel efficient cookstoves and climate-related knowledge that will benefit 
families of beneficiaries. Based on Somalia’s average household size, an estimated 189,000 family 
members of beneficiaries will benefit indirectly. 
Table 1: Geographical Coverage of Component 1 
 
20 The coverage regions for Component 1 have been identified based on the following criteria: (i) two target districts and one 
alternate district per FMS and Somaliland, (ii) demand from regional and district officials, (iii) accessibility for government 
supervision, (iv) capacity to implement the programs, (v) availability of complementary demand-side interventions such as cash 
transfer programs, and (vi) avoiding duplication with similar programs, such as the FCDO-financed AGES program. 
Regions within Federal Member States and 
Somaliland  
Proposed Districts  
Alternative 
District 
Banaadir 
Banadir Region 
Administration  
1 
Wadajir 
Yaqshid 
2 
Hawl-wadag 
Jubaland 
Lower Jubba and Gedo 
1 
Kismayo 
Dolow 
2 
Luq 
Puntland 
Bari and Nugal 
1 
Baran 
Buuhoodle 
2 
Eiyl 
Southwest 
Bay and Lower Shahbelle 
1 
Baidoa  
Waajid 
2 
Afgoye  
Galmudug 
Galgaduud and Mudug 
1 
Adado 
Galkacyo 
2 
Abudwak 
Hirshabelle 
Hiran and Middle Shabelle 
1 
Jalalaqsi 
Mahaday 
2 
Warsheekh 
Somaliland 
Maroodi-Jeex and 
Togdheer 
1 
Hargaisa 
Erigavo (Saanag 
Region) 
2 
Burao 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 65 
 
D. Results Chain 
44. 
Figure 3 shows the Theory of Change for the project. In the long term, the proposed project aims 
to contribute to improve literacy and numeracy skills, social-emotional and life skills, livelihood skills, and 
skills for leadership for adolescent girls and women. It is expected that over time there will be 
improvements in basic proficiency rates in literacy and numeracy in targeted populations and female 
women’s college students will complete their training and acquire relevant leadership skills. To achieve 
these goals, the project will focus on strengthening and expanding the supply of non-formal second 
chance programs with a focus on functional literacy and numeracy and cross-cutting skills. The project will 
also finance essential demand-side interventions including the provision of stipends to reduce costs for 
the most vulnerable students, provision of childcare facilities to enhance the attendance of female 
students, and awareness campaigns and active engagement with community and religious leaders. At the 
same time, the project will help develop Somalia’s system for delivery of second chance education, skills 
training, and higher education by establishing a skills fund, investing in innovative approaches to skills 
delivery, and supporting data collection infrastructure and capacity building, among other activities. A 
critical assumption in the results chain is that interventions at the school and community levels will be 
effective in influencing social norms and promoting girls’ and women’s attendance, retention, and 
completion to increase their educational and professional aspirations. 
Figure 3. Theory of Change 
 
O cial  se
 C      ES
   P  S
   C  ES
                                      
 
                                          
                                    
                                                
                                          
                                        
                          
                       
                                    
                                       
                                  
                    
                                
                                
          
                                    
                               
                                          
          
                                           
                                     
                                
                                       
                                         
         
                                          
                                
                           
                                         
                                     
                                          
                         
                               
                            
                  
                                         
                            
                                       
                                         
                             
                                   
                                   
                                       
                                        
                           
                  
             
          
                 
             
            
                
        
             
                 
             
          
                
         
                
          
                
                 
                
            
        
         
             
         
          
         
               
          
             
           
     
     
              
        
            
         
        
               
           
             
          
          
          
                
        
        
              
              
              
             
                 
              
              
         
      
Short
 erm
Long 
 erm
 edium 
 erm
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 65 
 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
45. 
The value added from the World Bank’s support derives from several aspects. These include the 
following:  
(a) The project will be co-financed by IDA and the SMPF and is a part of the overall support to 
the human capital development architecture for Somalia. 
(b) The project’s emphasis on reaching adolescent girls and women will complement several 
ongoing World Bank financed projects that focus on supporting girls’ education and 
women’s empowerment, as detailed in Section I D.  
(c) 
Under recurrent cost and reform financing (RCRF), capacity injection, and public financial 
management (PFM) projects, the World Bank’s support in strengthening and enhancing the 
use of government systems is well-placed to support the government’s efforts in 
institutional capacity development of key agencies at both the federal and FMS levels. 
(d) The World Bank has global and regional experience in designing and implementing similar 
comprehensive projects aimed at women’s empowerment and addressing the complex 
needs and challenges faced by girls and women.  
46. 
The project design considers the existing activities of development partners to ensure 
complementarity and value add of the “Rajo Kaaba” Project. The project builds on other ongoing 
interventions, including those supported by the UK (for example, Somalia Girls’ Education Promotion 
Program [SOMGEP] and AGES Project), the US (for example, Bar Ama Baro), and the various Global 
Partnership for Education (GPE) sources of funding that directly target or provide benefits to girls and 
young women in Somalia. This project adds value to these existing efforts in the following aspects: (a) the 
project has a broader geographic focus than the existing interventions, with at least two districts in each 
FMS and Somaliland, while at the same timing working centrally with the FGS; and (b) the competitive 
and open design of Components 1 and 2 will allow diverse stakeholders to participate in the NFE and 
higher education system through a more open and transparent approach. Perhaps most importantly, the 
project will improve cohesion and coordination in the NFE, skills, and higher education ecosystems in 
Somalia, eventually through the creation of the SDF and through the work on information systems in 
Component 3. Both Components 1 and 2 will take a coordinated approach to reviewing proposals, 
institutional arrangements, and implementation across the FMS and Somaliland, providing an approach 
through which the government can improve coordination between different service providers and 
development partners. Once established, the SDF will be able to accept finance from multiple funders, 
which could help encourage a more coordinated approach across these sub-sectors and different funding 
streams. Through work on harmonizing curriculum and programming across institutions to be awarded 
funding in Components 1 and 2, sharing of best practices, and the creation of the network of women’s 
colleges and Women’s College Board, the project will support the government to improve coordination 
of service delivery and quality across the targeted sub-sectors. During project implementation, 
coordination and dialogue with partners will help avoid duplication and ensure continued 
complementarity. World Bank meets routinely with education development partners in the Local 
Education Group led by the MoECHE with coordination support from the GPE.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 65 
 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
 
47. 
Successful training programs are responsive to labor market demand for skills, include 
interventions to support participation by vulnerable populations of women, and emphasize non-
cognitive skills. The project design encourages strong engagement between employers and training 
institutions and will engage employers, civil society, training institutions, and policy makers in discussions 
to develop skills qualifications. Successful, rigorously evaluated programs such as the Empowerment of 
Adolescent Girls and Young Women (EPAG) in Liberia have supported beneficiaries’ enrollment and 
attendance through financial assistance (contingent on attendance), part-time course design, on-site 
childcare, and broader engagement with families and communities. Evidence also shows that training on 
psychological skills such as personal initiative, future orientation, persistence, and ‘entrepreneurial 
mindset’ can be much more effective that traditional business training in improving women's livelihoods. 
48. 
To address significant equity challenges in Somalia, higher education interventions must 
address multiple factors that prevent girls and women from fully unlocking their potential. Current 
initiatives aimed at addressing these challenges in the region underline the importance of engaging the 
broader community, and in higher education, point to the success of three types of interventions: 
scholarships, mentoring, and role models. An ongoing initiative in Ethiopia, for example, is promoting 
gender equality at all levels of education and has set ambitious targets for female participation. In higher 
education, mentoring and networking activities are increasingly used as strategic interventions to expand 
women’s participation and progression into successful careers.  
49. 
There are opportunities to leverage technology even in fragile contexts, and mobile learning 
solutions can be effective at promoting literacy and numeracy. The activities in Component 3, including 
tracer studies and Education Management Information System (EMIS) development, reflect the 
importance of regular collection of process and outcomes data and beneficiary feedback to continually 
strengthen programs. A review of World Bank EMIS investments found that EMIS can strengthen 
education systems even in fragile contexts such as Afghanistan, where mobile technology was critical in 
producing real-time data for decision-makers21. In Niger, a poor and fragile context, rigorous evaluations 
showed that providing adult NFE learners the opportunity to practice their literacy and numeracy skills 
using a mobile phone improved their learning outcomes, and mobile monitoring of adult education sites 
increased learning. The use of mobile technology can also increase the resilience of service delivery to 
shocks such as pandemics, climate-related events, and conflict, as demonstrated by the World Bank’s 
experience in FCV contexts and during COVID-19-related school closures. These solutions are well 
matched to the context of Somalia as mobile penetration is high, with approximately 90 percent of Somalis 
above 16 years of age having a phone.22 
 
 
 
 
21 Abdul-Hamid, Husein, Namrata Saraogi, and Sarah Mintz. 2017. Lessons Learned from World Bank Education Management 
Information System Operations: Portfolio Review, 1998–2014. World Bank Studies. Washington, DC: World Bank.  
22 Government of Somalia.  Somalia National Development Plan (2020 to 2024).   
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 65 
 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
50. 
The proposed project will be implemented by the MoECHE and the FMS and Somaliland 
Ministries of Education. The MoECHE will be responsible for oversight and coordination of all project 
activities and reporting on project progress and performance. The FMS will be responsible for service 
delivery in their respective jurisdictions. Regional, district education and community education 
committees will also play an important role in the delivery of project activities. 
51. 
The project will benefit from the existing implementation arrangements used for the ongoing 
Somalia EHCD Project and will share the PMU of the Somalia EHCD Project. A new Project Steering 
Committee will be established for “Raajo Kaaba” (chaired by the MoECHE) and a Project Management 
Committee with responsibilities for technical leadership (Annex 1). The project will initially take advantage 
of spare implementation capacity at the existing Somalia EHCD Project PMU. As implementation in both 
projects accelerates, the PMU staffing will expand under the direction of an overall project manager. Key 
recruits are expected to support Component 1 (a technical officer and grants/procurement officer) and 
Component 2 (a technical officer and grants/procurement officer). Additional staffing will be considered 
as needed, and a staffing plan will be created during the first year.  
52. 
The PMU will be responsible for overall project management, coordination, implementation, 
monitoring, and day-to-day responsibility of the project. Key responsibilities of the PMU will include (a) 
ensuring that project activities are implemented as agreed and in compliance with the World Bank 
technical and fiduciary guidelines; (b) leading technical, operational, and fiduciary functions, especially 
contracting 
and 
contract 
management; 
and 
(c) 
coordinating 
and 
overseeing 
project 
implementation/management in the respective FMS, including M&E of project activities, capacity 
building, and ensuring compliance with the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) requirements. The 
PMU will also prepare the annual work plan and budget and conduct quarterly progress reviews. In 
addition, the PMU will coordinate project activities with the education implementing partners and 
education sector coordination committees (ESCs) at the FGS and FMS levels. 
53. 
To ensure smooth implementation of project activities, a POM will be prepared by the PMU for 
the World Bank’s review and approval within three months of project effectiveness. This will clarify 
project activities, including fiduciary/disbursement and environmental and social implementation 
arrangements, roles and responsibilities of the parties involved, and coordination mechanisms. A third-
party independent verification agency will be contracted by the MoECHE to conduct M&E of the program.  
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
54. 
Overall responsibility for project M&E will lie with the PMU in coordination with the FMS and 
Somaliland PMUs, and the Higher Education Commission and National Women’s College Board, for 
oversight of the consortium of women's colleges. An M&E officer will be a core part of the PMU team to 
coordinate across these entities and manage all project monitoring, reporting, and evaluation activities. 
Specific responsibilities include compiling results data across project components, supervising project 
implementation sites, conducting process and/or impact evaluations of project activities, implementing 
citizens' engagement surveys to gather beneficiary and community feedback, and reporting on the 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 65 
 
engagement surveys to key decision-makers to improve project performance. Component 3 of the project 
will finance technical assistance for the PMU on M&E, including an independent verification agent to 
validate results reported by service providers and ensure the integrity of the skills fund payment 
requirements. A separate reporting structure will be established for Somaliland. 
55. 
Beneficiary feedback will be used to improve the delivery of services financed by the project. 
All project beneficiaries will be surveyed on their level of satisfaction with the skills they have acquired, 
as appropriate, to the program they participated in (functional literacy and numeracy, livelihood skills and 
life skills, and leadership skills); what additional constraints, if any, are preventing them from making use 
of their new skills; and their suggestions for improving the programs. Beneficiaries who did not complete 
the programs will also be surveyed on the reasons for non-completion. The PMU will prepare a report 
annually on the results of these surveys and develop action plans to improve on any areas of weakness 
identified from beneficiary responses, with particular attention to beneficiaries with disabilities and other 
types of disadvantages. Follow-up actions may include discontinuing low-performing programs and 
changing the terms of reference for service providers to better meet beneficiary needs. Beneficiaries will 
be provided with a short and accessible summary of the actions taken in response to these surveys 
through the same platform through which they completed the survey (for example, SMS).  
56. 
As new EMIS subsystems are developed through the project, they will gradually take on the 
functions of management and analysis of project data. EMIS modules for NFE, skills, and higher education 
will be developed as outputs of the project, and as they come online, the tracking of key indicators will 
transition to the new systems. In the interim, the project will build on the system developed through the 
Somalia EHCD Project for collection and management of data. Beneficiary information collected through 
online and/or SMS surveys will be handled in accordance with the FGS data protection policies. 
57. 
The project will use mobile technology to collect data in remote, conflict-affected, and fragile 
operating environments. The project will build government capacity in the use of mobile tools for day-to-
day project supervision in coordination with the Somalia EHCD Project. Data collection instruments will 
be designed for use on both tablets/smartphones and non-smartphones. The project is expected to 
benefit from the World Bank's Geo-Enabled Initiative for Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS) initiative, 
which will help develop open-source tools to collect and collate digital data including photos, audio and 
video recordings, time and date stamps, and Global Positioning System (GPS) coordinates.  
C. Sustainability 
 
58. 
The project’s system-building activities provide clear pathways to the sustainability of project 
investments. Component 1 will engage a diverse range of service providers as the PIPs and create a 
sustainable mechanism to engage the non-state sector to deliver NFE. Component 2 will lay the 
groundwork for a system of women’s colleges and WDCs, which will become the leading edge of higher 
education reform in the country. This network of institutions will outlive the project and can attract 
additional financing from government, foundations, development partners, and—gradually over time —
earned income through tuition and fees. Component 3 will equip the government with a set of tools to 
continue moving toward a more evidence-driven and beneficiary-responsive skills and higher education 
system. The establishment of the SDF creates a platform for public and private actors to collaborate in 
skills provision; communicate regularly in policy dialogue and strategic planning; and hold one another 
accountable in terms of contracting, financing, and quality assurance. The SDF provides a mechanism—
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 65 
 
which will outlive the project—to pool resources from development partners, the private sector, and 
government and strategically invest those resources in a variety of programs that are responsive to 
varying supply- and demand-side considerations in Somalia’s decentralized and fragile context.  
59. 
The sustainability of the project is underscored by high-level government commitment to the 
joint policy goals of increased female participation in the labor force and increased women’s 
participation in business and political leadership. A key element of this coherence is the tight connection 
between the project’s support for women’s leadership capacity and the government’s high-level goal of 
the 30 percent quota for women in parliament. This connection will lead to greater sustainability of 
project activities in the government’s vision, policy, and medium-term budget support. The project’s 
investments will be sustained in part due to well-established economic externalities associated with 
women’s educational and labor market returns, including income generation; children’s health and 
nutrition benefits; and enhanced political stability. 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
A. Technical and Economic Analysis 
60. 
The proposed project aims to enhance learning for approximately 31,500 students across 
second chance, TVET, and higher education, with a focus on girls and young women. The main goal is to 
improve literacy, numeracy, and income-generating skills in targeted populations of women and prepare 
selected women for leadership roles. According to the 2018 High Frequency Survey for Somalia, about 
half of the population is literate. As presented earlier, among women ages 15–49 years, in rural and urban 
areas, 72 percent and 59 percent, respectively, have never attended school. Figure 4 presents the 
population distribution in Somalia by education levels for those 15 years or older. 
Figure 4. Somali Population Distribution by Education Level 
 
 Source: Somalia 2018 High Frequency Survey. 
61. 
A cost-benefit analysis was conducted to measure the financial feasibility of the project. 
Benefits were calculated from the private returns to beneficiaries of second chance, TVET, and higher 
education interventions financed by the project. In the absence of data for Somalia, the average returns 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Female
Male
Total
No education
Incomplete Primary
Complete Primary/Incomplete Secondary
Complete Secondary
University
Other
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 65 
 
to education in Sub-Saharan Africa were used.23 Costs comprised project costs for all components and 
opportunity costs related to students’ forgone earnings as they acquire higher levels of education and 
skills training. The 2019 GPD per capita was US$320—before the start of the COVID-19 pandemic—and 
was used as the baseline for foregone earnings and to calculate wage premiums. The life expectancy in 
Somalia is around 58 years and the analysis considered those who benefited from project’s interventions 
working for 25 years after completing programs. Finally, the analysis also considered a labor force 
participation rate of 47 percent and a discount rate of 5 percent. 
62. 
The economic analysis confirms the feasibility of the project, with the net present value (NPV) 
estimated to be US$10.2 million and an internal rate of return of 17 percent. The NPV of benefits of the 
project was estimated at US$61.4 million. This is higher than the NPV of the total costs estimated at 
US$51.2 million. These are conservative estimates based on the expected number of beneficiaries over 
the project life. Furthermore, externalities – including the expected increase in government’s tax income 
due to individual’s higher earnings and consumption, the positive impact that education of girls and young 
women can have on fertility rates and children’s health outcomes, and the impact that better educated 
individuals can have on innovation and entrepreneurship – were not included in the calculations.  
B. Fiduciary 
(i) Financial Management 
63. 
In undertaking the financial management (FM) assessment for this project, attention was paid 
to government PFM systems in the education sector. In particular, the assessment covered the sector’s 
planning and budgeting approaches; funding flow and banking arrangements; accounting; and internal 
control frameworks, including payroll controls and the supporting systems, reporting, and external audit 
and oversight arrangements. The assessment accounted for the extent to which the existing systems are 
mainstreamed into the country’s PFM systems. The FM systems and arrangements will include budgeting; 
accounting; internal controls; funds flow; financial reporting and internal and external auditing 
arrangements; FM staffing; risks management; and related policies, procedures, and practices. The 
objective of the assessment was to ascertain whether the FM systems will facilitate the preparation of 
regular, timely, and reliable financial statements; support the provision of a complete, true, and fair record 
of all transactions and balances; safeguard assets; and enable internal and external auditing 
arrangements, in line with the World Bank FM policies and internationally accepted standards. 
64. 
In view of the specific context and operating environment in Somalia, the overall fiduciary risk 
for the project is assessed as High. The high-risk rating is largely attributable to the following: 
(a) 
The weak institutional and systems capacities at the federal, states, regional, and district 
levels. The necessary policies, procedures, and legal framework to support the sector are 
under formation with support from international development partners. 
(b) 
Deficient human resource capital to restore basic education at all levels of government. 
(c) 
A comparatively weak education system. 
 
23 “Comparable Estimates of Returns to Schooling around the World.” 2014. Policy Research Working Paper WPS 7020, World 
Bank, Washington, DC. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 65 
 
(d) 
Sustainability challenges as the education sector is largely managed and funded outside of 
country systems with support from international development partners (mainly bilateral 
programs implemented by international NGOs).  
(e) 
Inadequate resources to finance the sector in line with the priorities of the government(s) 
(that is, increased access for girls and women to schools, establishment of delivery and 
accountability systems, and rehabilitation of destroyed education facilities). 
(f) 
Lack of a unified/harmonized policy to govern salaries, grading, and payments systems within 
the sector across the country (salary levels are largely dictated by availability and sources of 
funding). 
(g) 
A rudimentary and fragmented EMIS to facilitate effective and efficient management of 
information within the sector. 
 
65. 
Given the consideration for Use of Country Systems (UCS), the project will adopt the UCS in 
various aspects of the project’s F , including budgeting and accounting, and reporting, banking, and 
oversight arrangements with the Office of the Auditor General. This will be supported by technical 
assistance with clear requirements for knowledge transfer incorporated in the terms of reference. Like 
other World Bank-supported operations in Somalia, the External Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS), 
established within the Offices of the Accountant General at Somaliland, FGS, and FMS, will be charged 
with the project’s overall FM responsibility for all projects financed by IDA and trust fund resources at 
Somaliland, FGS, and FMS, whose performances thus far has been satisfactory. With overall guidance from 
the Accountant General(s) and the EAFS units, the respective MoECHE’s Department of TVET and NFE, in 
close collaboration with their equivalents at the FMS level and in Somaliland and the Ministry of Labor, 
will continue to provide day-to-day FM oversight of the project. The effectiveness of the EAFS units, 
alongside other key functional units, will be continuously monitored, while key areas of capacity 
strengthening will be identified and supported through the project. The existing organizational and 
functional structure of the EAFS units will be further strengthened to provide effective FM support to the 
project. 
66. 
All project FM transactions will be recognized, captured, recorded, analyzed, summarized, and 
reported through the government Financial Management Information System(s). The EAFS units, with 
support of the respective Accountant General(s), will ensure that (a) all important business and financial 
processes are adhered to, (b) adequate internal controls and procedures are in place and adequately 
enforced, (c) unaudited interim financial reports (IFRs) are prepared on time, (d) all Statements of 
Expenditures (SOEs) are submitted to the World Bank on a timely basis, (e) the project financial 
statements are prepared on time and in accordance with International Public Sector Accounting Standards 
cash basis, and (d) the external audit is completed on time and audit findings and 
recommendations/issues raised in the management letter are implemented expeditiously. 
(ii) Procurement 
67. 
Procurement under the proposed project will be carried out in accordance with the following 
World Bank procedures: (a) the World Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers, dated July 2016 
and updated in November 2020; (b) Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in 
Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants, dated October 15, 2006, and revised in 
January 2011 and July 1, 2016; (c) the World Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines dated July 1, 2016; and (d) 
other provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreements.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 65 
 
68. 
Procurement implementation arrangements: The project will be implemented by the federal 
MoECHE and FMS (including Benadir, Galmudug, HirShabelle, Jubbaland, Puntland, and South West) and 
Somaliland Ministries of Education. The federal MoECHE will be responsible for policy development, 
standard setting, and monitoring, and the states are mandated to implement education programs and 
policies. FMS will be responsible for the service delivery in their respective jurisdictions through their own 
Ministries of Education. The PMU, shared with the Somalia EHCD Project, will be responsible for the day-
to-day operations of the project including procurement with oversight from a Project Steering Committee 
and Project Management Committee. The PMU will be headed by a project manager. The PMU will include 
key project staff and specialists to manage key functions, such as FM and procurement, at the FMS level. 
Additionally, the PMU will be responsible for coordinating project activities between the implementing 
partners, local ESCs, and local civil society organizations and FMS.  
69. 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) and Procurement Plan (PP). The World 
Bank’s New Procurement Regulations will apply to the project. In this regard, the Federal Republic of 
Somalia has prepared a PPSD to formulate the best procurement approach/solution based on which the 
PP for the first 18 months of project implementation has been developed. The PP sets out the selection 
methods to be followed by the recipient during project implementation for procurement of goods, works, 
and consulting services. The PP also includes the cost estimates, time schedules, the World Bank’s review 
requirements, brief description of the activities/contracts, and so on. The PP will be updated in agreement 
with the World Bank annually, or as required, to reflect the project’s actual implementation needs and 
improvements in institutional capacity. Each update shall require the WBG’s approval.  
70. 
Procurement management risk is assessed as High. The procurement environment in Somalia 
remains challenging. The main procurement associated risks are (a) limited number of competent and 
dedicated procurement staff; (b) weak capacity of bidders and limited service providers; (c) high price of 
bids/proposals due to security conditions in some parts of the country; (d) fraud and corruption; (e) 
collusion among bidders due to limited competition; (f) inadequate experience in procurement planning, 
monitoring, and contract management; (g) delays in procurement implementation should the COVID-19 
crisis remain prolonged due to disruptions in supply chains resulting in price volatility and unavailability 
of items; and (h) weak legal and financial institutions (bank and insurance agencies are not well 
established). Proposed mitigation measures include (a) ensuring that the PMU always has a dedicated 
procurement specialist with relevant and adequate qualification and experience acceptable to the World 
Bank as well as ensuring that the POM includes a well described procurement management process; (b) 
ensuring that all procurement activities regardless of value, nature, categories, or packages will be treated 
as prior review and reviewed by the World Bank; (c) training the PMU/stakeholders staff by the World 
Bank on the new Procurement Regulations; and (d) involving a probity adviser where appropriate.  
71. 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP). The World Bank’s STEP tool will be 
used to prepare, clear, and update PPs and conduct all procurement transactions for all implementing 
agencies of the project. Procurement staff of the implementing agencies will be trained on using STEP. 
C. Legal Operational Policies 
. 
. 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
No 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 65 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 
No 
. 
 
D. Environmental and Social 
 
72. 
The environmental risk rating is Substantial. This is due to the environmental risks that may arise 
from proposed construction activities under Component 2 in the project. Rehabilitation and limited 
construction of the respective women’s colleges is likely to result in the occurrence of environmental 
impacts, including noise pollution, soil erosion, waste and wastewater management, loss of vegetation, 
e-waste, and possible occupational health and fire safety risks. Congregating large numbers of persons 
during the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to result in exposure to the virus. The project is likely to be 
implemented by under-resourced and inexperienced construction companies whose capacities for 
environmental and social implementation are not known, who may lack knowledge of regulations for 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and Occupation Health and Safety requirements, 
and who may have little knowledge of good international industry practice. There are substantial security 
risks for the project, too, including wider contextual security circumstances and possible exposure of 
project workers and students enrolled under the project to attacks. Security risks are, therefore, a key 
area of concern for interventions in Somalia. In particular, the Somali Women University is likely to require 
special security considerations, given possible challenges with the safety of women students. The capacity 
for environmental governance at the Ministry of Education is weak.  These risks will be mitigated by way 
of key ESF instruments, including mitigation measures enumerated in the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), Labor Management Procedures (LMP), and Security Management 
Framework (SMF) for the project. The MoECHE disclosed on May 10, 2022 the ESMF, which includes a 
GBV Action Plan, Waste Management Plan (WMP), and LMP, the Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
(SEP), incorporating the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), and the  Environmental and Social 
Commitment Plan (ESCP) .  Consultations with key stakeholders were held on October 11, 2021, and 
February 7, 2022. 
73. 
Social risk rating for the project is High. Overall, it is expected that the project will contribute 
considerably to strengthening women’s empowerment, not just among the immediate beneficiaries but 
also indirectly to society at large. Based on international research, this is consequently also expected to 
lead to positive social outcomes on peace processes, institution building, respect for vulnerable groups, 
and so on. However, during the transition toward stronger gender equity, social risks may increase, both 
toward project beneficiaries and project implementors. Social norms around early marriage, expectations 
that girls support households and rearing of younger siblings, and greater social value placed on boys 
accessing education over girls play a role in lower enrollment and completion rates of girls, in addition to 
a predominantly male teaching force and long distances to schools, will need to be addressed as part of 
implementation. Thus, the project has to address an imbalanced power structure, which may trigger 
intentional and unintentional backlash, including varying forms of GBV, including by extreme-conservative 
political groups, in an already challenging FCV situation with considerable security risks. This relates above 
all to second chance education activities and the operation of the women’s colleges. The project must 
also address risks of exclusion through an inclusion assessment and management instrument, which 
equally will address the risk resulting from data collection activities. This extends to data collection. The 
project also entails more standard ESF risks on eventual small-scale land acquisition and involuntary 
resettlement, inward migration, labor influx and possible use of child labor, elite capture of project 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 65 
 
benefits, human trafficking, exclusion, and access to beneficiaries for effective consultations and 
grievance redress. Respective risk management instruments are being developed accordingly. 
74. 
The risk of sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment (SEA/SH), and other forms of GBV 
is High. Gender-restrictive norms and lack of decision-making power are often cited as barriers for women 
and girls accessing education opportunities and increasing exposure to harm. The risk of violence or 
assault may also increase while travelling long distances to reach schools. Other factors, such as unequal 
gender and power relations, can exacerbate the risks of GBV in schools especially where unethical school 
administrators/teachers or facilitators take advantage of their positions and sexually exploit students as 
well as the potential of sexual harassment for female teachers. During the process of creating each of the 
women’s colleges, disruption of power dynamics might surface in a community and within households 
due to the arrival of the workforce in the area. It can be during construction, as women in the community 
come into contact with mobile workmen in various ways, including direct employment on the project 
during construction or operation or indirectly through associated services such as catering. Although 
construction activities are likely to be minor to moderate in size, measures, during construction and 
operation, will include the following:  
(a) Conducting the PMU sensitization and capacity building to improve understanding, 
management, and monitoring of SEA/SH risks throughout the life of the project 
(b) Reinforcing codes of conduct that address GBV/SEA/SH in schools to cultivate an environment 
free from GBV and SEA/SH 
(c) Ensuring regular community consultations to raise awareness of the risk of SEA/GBV and 
measures for reporting and response 
(d) Ensuring that grievance redress measures include mechanisms for safe and confidential 
reporting of cases of SEA/SH 
(e) Mapping out GBV service providers and identifying a dedicated referral process for school-
related violations and relevant organizations for referrals, developing procedures and 
processes for referrals, and developing an accountability framework for handling allegations 
(f) 
Conducting regular safety mapping with the students, teachers, community, and parents to 
identify areas within and outside the schools where they feel unsafe and develop remedial 
actions where necessary. 
 
75. 
SEA/SH risk mitigation requirements will be established in an SEA/SH Action Plan and will also 
be addressed, where relevant, in social risk management instruments. The SEA/SH Action Plan will be 
prepared during the first six months of the project. SEA/SH risks will also be addressed, where relevant, 
in social risk management instruments.  Citizen engagement will be facilitated through active outreach 
and communication campaigns within beneficiary communities and engagement of key stakeholders in 
the GRM process.  The project results framework includes an indicator to measure beneficiary satisfaction 
with outcomes of training programs.  States may engage the support of CSOs working in the project areas 
to support the GRM activities or NGOs/an independent call center to receive and help process complaints 
on an as-needed basis. 
76. 
Grievance redress mechanism (GRM). A robust system to address grievances will be set up at the 
project level, providing stakeholders with multiple pathways to file grievances and ensuring that training 
is given to all project staff and relevant government officials. Stakeholders will have multiple ways of 
channeling complaints on any aspect of the project. This will be through radio, mobile phones, community 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 65 
 
meetings, email, and websites. There will also be opportunities for in-person reports at the community 
level through community leaders and institutions. Complaints may be raised by staff, partners, 
consultants, contractors, members of the community where the program is operating, or members of the 
general public regarding any aspect of program implementation. To help ensure that the process does not 
marginalize women and other vulnerable groups, representation for these groups will be required in the 
grievance committee tasked to resolve grievances/complaints at the community level. Any SEA/SH cases 
will be referred the GBV reporting protocols and referral system, defined in the SEA/SH Prevention and 
Response Action Plan. Dedicated training on how to respond to and manage complaints related to SEA/SH 
will be required for all GRM operators and relevant project staff. The MoECHE will have the responsibility 
of overseeing the resolution of all issues related to the project activities in accordance with the FGS laws 
and World Bank Environmental and Social Standards. The entry point for all grievances will be with the 
social safeguards’ specialists at the FGS and FMS levels, who will receive grievances by phone, text, or 
email to publicized toll-free mobile phone lines and email addresses at both the FMS and FGS levels. The 
social safeguards specialists will acknowledge, log, forward, and follow up the grievance resolutions and 
inform the complainant of the outcome. The complainant has the right to remain anonymous. The FGS 
social specialist will carry out training of all the PMU staff and Ministry of Education staff involved with 
the project and contractors, on receiving complaints and referral and complaints handling and reporting 
and will oversee awareness raising on the GRM at the national level. 
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES 
77. 
Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank-
supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the 
World Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly 
reviewed in order to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may 
submit their complaint to the World Bank’s independent Inspection Panel which determines whether 
harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of World Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures. 
Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank's 
attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond.  For information on how to 
submit 
complaints 
to 
the 
World 
Bank’s 
corporate 
GRS, 
please 
visit 
http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-service. 
For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit 
www.inspectionpanel.org.    
VI. 
KEY RISKS 
78. 
The overall risk of the project is considered substantial. This is the result of a combination of 
factors that include country fragility, public sector governance, fiscal capacity, and political uncertainty. 
Security risks and extremist-instigated violence often make parts of the country inaccessible for project 
implementation and supervision, putting project execution and PDO achievements at risk. The principal 
mitigation measures for these risks include preselecting geographic delivery zones toward localities less 
prone to political violence and continuous monitoring and a design that enables rapid adaptation of 
implementation in cases of known security risks. The project will also use technology, such as mobile 
phone-based programs, for delivery of at-home learning materials, which could provide continuity to the 
interventions in case of a deterioration in the security situation, drawing on the World Bank’s recent 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills Project - "Rajo Kaaba" (P176898) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 65 
 
experiences of distance learning during the COVID-19 pandemic. While the project will incorporate risk 
mitigation measures, residual inherent risks will remain substantial. Fiduciary risks (High) and 
environmental and social risks (Substantial and High, respectively) and mitigation measures are detailed 
in their respective sections (IV B and IV D), and other risks are elaborated below.  
79. 
Political and governance risks are high. Governance risks are related to the social and political 
ownership of the project and its PDOs. Given th