 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD4759  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT 
ON A 
PROPOSED GRANT 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 46.8 MILLION 
(US$60 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
CO-FINANCED BY A 
PROPOSED GRANT 
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$15 MILLION 
FROM THE SOMALIA MULTI-PARTNER FUND 2 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA  
 
FOR AN 
 
SOMALIA ENHANCING PUBLIC RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PROJECT 
 
November 21, 2022 
 
 
 
 
Governance Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
 
 
 
 
   
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective {October 31, 2022}) 
 
Currency Unit =   
Special Drawing Rights 
(SDR);  
Somali Shilling (SOS) 
US$1 =  SOS 568.50 
US$1 = SDR 0.78 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Victoria Kwakwa 
Country Director: Keith E. Hansen 
Regional Director: Asad Alam 
Practice Manager: Manuel Vargas 
Task Team Leaders: Jiwanka B. Wickramasinghe, Lucy Anyango Musira, Sher 
Shah Khan 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
ATAF 
African Tax Administration Forum 
CIP  
Capacity Injection Project  
CPF  
Country Partnership Framework  
COAPM 
Comprehensive Operating, Accounting and Procedures Manual 
COVID-19 
Coronavirus Disease 2019 
CRATES  
Customs Reform and Trade Enhancement Somalia  
CSSP  
Civil Service Strengthening Project  
DA 
Designated Account 
DP 
Development Partner 
DPO 
Development Policy Operation 
DRM 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization 
E&S 
Environmental and Social 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
ESCP 
Environment and Social Commitment Plan 
ESF 
Environmental and Social Framework 
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
ESRS 
Environmental and Social Review Summary  
ESS 
Environmental and Social Standards 
EU  
European Union  
FCDO 
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office  
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia  
FMIS 
Financial Management Information System 
FMSs 
Federal Member States  
GBV 
Gender-Based Violence 
GDP  
Gross Domestic Product  
GEMS 
Geo-Enabling initiative for Monitoring and Supervision 
GFSM 
Government Finance Statistics Manual 
GRM 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service 
GSS 
Galmudug State of Somalia  
HIPC 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries  
HR 
Human Resource 
HRM 
Human Resource Management 
HRMIS  
Human Resource Management Information System  
HSS 
Hirshabelle State of Somalia 
ICT  
Information and Communication Technology  
IDA 
International Development Association 
IFI  
International Financial Institution  
IFR 
Interim Financial Report 
IGFF  
Intergovernmental Fiscal Forum  
 
 
 
IGFFTM 
Intergovernmental Fiscal Federalism Technical Meeting 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
IPF 
Investment Project Financing  
IPSAS 
International Public Sector Accounting Standard 
ITAS  
Integrated Tax Administration Automation System  
JSS 
Jubbaland State of Somalia  
LMP 
Labor Management Procedures 
LTO 
Large Taxpayer Office 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MDAs 
Ministries, Departments, and Agencies  
MoF 
Ministry of Finance 
MTFF 
Medium-Term Fiscal Framework  
MTRS  
Medium-Term Revenue Strategy  
NDP9  
Ninth National Development Plan  
Norad 
Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation 
NPARSF  
National Public Administration Reform Strategy Framework  
OAG 
Office of Auditor General 
OBS 
Open Budget Survey 
ODA 
Official Development Assistance 
P&G  
Pay and Grading  
PAC 
Public Account Committee 
PBC 
Performance-Based Condition  
PCU 
Project Coordination Unit 
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
PFM  
Public Financial Management 
PFM RAP  
PFM Reform Action Plan  
PIM 
Public Investment Management 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PLFMIS 
Puntland Financial Management Information System 
POM 
Project Operations Manual 
PPA 
Public Procurement Authority 
PPP  
Public-Private Partnership  
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development 
PREMIS  
Public Resource Management in Somalia  
PROFR  
Prosperity from Revenue 
PSC 
Project Steering Committee 
PSM 
Public Sector Management 
PSS 
Puntland State of Somalia  
RCRF 
Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reforms Financing Project 
SCSP ASA 
Somalia Customs Support Advisory Services and Analytics Project 
SEA 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
SEAH 
Sexual Exploitation, Abuse, and Harassment 
SEAH -PRAP 
Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment Prevention and Response Action Plan 
SEP 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
 
 
 
SERP 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project 
SFMIS 
Somalia Financial Management Information System 
SL 
Somaliland 
SLFMIS 
Somaliland Financial Management Information System 
SMF 
Security Management Framework 
SMPF 
Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
SOE 
Statement of Expenditure 
SSC 
Somaliland Steering Committee 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
SWSS 
Southwest State of Somalia  
TA 
Technical Assistance 
TIN  
Taxpayer Identification Number  
TPU 
Tax Policy Unit  
TWG 
Technical Working Group 
UCS 
Use of Country Systems 
USD 
United States Dollars 
WBG 
World Bank Group  
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... 1 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 7 
A. Country Context................................................................................................................................ 7 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................. 10 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ............................................................................................. 17 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 19 
A. Project Development Objective ..................................................................................................... 19 
B. Project Components ....................................................................................................................... 19 
C. Project Beneficiaries ....................................................................................................................... 31 
D. Results Chain .................................................................................................................................. 32 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners ................................................................... 33 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design .................................................................... 33 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................ 35 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 35 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements......................................................................... 37 
C. Sustainability ................................................................................................................................... 38 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 39 
A. Economic and Technical Analysis and World Bank Value-Added ................................................... 39 
B. Fiduciary .......................................................................................................................................... 43 
C. Legal Operational Policies ............................................................................................................... 45 
D. Environmental and Social ............................................................................................................... 45 
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES ..................................................................................... 48 
VI. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 49 
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 54 
ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan .......................................... 70 
ANNEX 2: SERP Intervention Mapping across Common Themes ..................................... 84 
ANNEX 3: FGS, FMSs, and SL Reform Achievements ....................................................... 87 
  
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
     
Page 1 of 90 
 
      
DATASHEET 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 
 BASIC INFO TABLE 
Country(ies) 
Project Name 
Somalia 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental and Social Risk 
Classification 
Process 
P177298 
Investment Project 
Financing 
Substantial 
Urgent Need or 
Capacity Constraints 
(FCC) 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component  (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[  ] Conflict  
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Enhanced Implementation Support (HEIS) 
 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
14-Dec-2022 
31-Dec-2027 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
No 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To strengthen accountability, transparency and institutional capacity in public resource management, across 
participating entities 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 90  
     
 
 
Components 
 
Component Name  
Cost (US$, millions) 
 
Component 1: Public Financial Management  
  22.50 
 
Component 2: Domestic Revenue Mobilization  
  26.00 
 
Component 3: Public Sector Management  
  14.50 
 
Component 4: Integrated Governance Support  
   4.00 
 
Component 5: Project Management, Coordination and Support in Delivery  
   8.00 
 
 
Organizations 
 
Borrower:  
 Federal Republic of  Somalia  
Implementing Agency: 
 Federal Ministry of Finance, Somalia  
 Ministry of Finance, Somaliland  
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
Total Project Cost 
75.00 
Total Financing 
75.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
60.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILS-NewFinEnh1 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
60.00 
          IDA Grant 
60.00 
Non-World Bank Group Financing 
     Trust Funds 
15.00 
          Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
15.00 
 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 90  
     
 
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
SML Amount 
Guarantee 
Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
   0.00 
  60.00 
0.00 
   0.00 
  60.00 
National 
Performance-Based 
Allocations (PBA) 
   0.00 
  60.00 
0.00 
   0.00 
  60.00 
Total 
   0.00 
  60.00 
   0.00 
   0.00 
  60.00 
 
 
 
 
Expected Disbursements (in US$, Millions) 
 
WB Fiscal Year   
 
 
 
 
 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
2027 
Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
   8.00 
   9.00 
  19.00 
  19.00 
   5.00 
Cumulative 
 
 
 
 
 
   8.00 
  17.00 
  36.00 
  55.00 
  60.00 
  
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Governance 
 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
⚫ High 
2. Macroeconomic 
⚫ Substantial 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ Substantial 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ High 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
⚫ Substantial 
6. Fiduciary 
⚫ Substantial 
7. Environment and Social 
⚫ Substantial 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 90  
     
 
8. Stakeholders 
⚫ Substantial 
9. Other 
⚫ High 
10. Overall 
⚫ High 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?  
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
  
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Not Currently Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 90  
     
 
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
Legal Covenants 
  
 Sections and Description 
Schedule 2, Section I.B.1.(a) The Recipient shall, no later than 30 days from the Effective Date, establish, and 
thereafter maintain throughout the period of implementation of its Respective Activities under the Project, a 
steering committee with membership and terms of reference acceptable to the Association (variously, the “Project 
Steering Committee” or “PSC”), as further elaborated in the POM; which committee shall: (i) be responsible for 
strategic policy and decision making, technical coordination across FGS and FMSs, and leading on harmonization 
where appropriate; (ii) meet periodically, as necessary, to provide policy guidance and high-level oversight to the 
PCU; (iii) take decision on high level critical implementation issues under the Project; (iv) closely coordinate and 
share information with the Recipient’s intergovernmental fiscal forum and (v) ensure inter-agency coordination and 
cooperation. 
 
 
 
 
Conditions 
  
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
Trust Funds, IBRD/IDA 
Article IV. Section 4.01. (a) the Recipient has established and 
operationalized the PCU referred to in Section I.B.1(b) of Schedule 2 
of the Financing Agreement, in form and substance satisfactory to 
the Association. 
 
 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
Trust Funds, IBRD/IDA 
Article IV. Section 4.01. (b) the Recipient has prepared and formally 
adopted the Project Operation Manual for its Respective Activities 
under the Project in a manner and substance satisfactory to the 
Association, pursuant to Section I.C.1 of Schedule 2 of the Financing 
Agreement. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
Trust Funds, IBRD/IDA 
Article IV. Section 4.01. (c) the Recipient has prepared, cleared, 
disclosed and adopted the ESMF, LMP, SEAH-PRAP, and SMF (as 
those terms are referred to in the ESCP), in form and manner 
satisfactory to the Association. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
Trust Funds, IBRD/IDA 
Article IV. Section 4.01. (d) the Recipient has operationalized the 
grievance redress mechanism referred to in paragraph 6 of Section 
I.E in Schedule 2 of the Financing Agreement, in a manner and 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 90  
     
 
substance satisfactory to the Association. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
Trust Funds, IBRD/IDA 
Article IV. Section 4.01. (e) the SMPF 2 Grant Agreement has been 
executed and delivered and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness or to the right of the Recipient to make withdrawals 
under it (other than the effectiveness of the Financing Agreement) 
have been fulfilled. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
Trust Funds, IBRD/IDA 
Article IV. Section 4.01(b). The Financing Agreement has been 
executed and delivered and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness, or of the right of the Recipient to make withdrawals 
under it, (other than the effectiveness of this Agreement), have 
been fulfilled. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Disbursement 
Trust Funds, IBRD/IDA 
Schedule2, Section III.B.1.(b) No withdrawal shall be made under 
Category (2) until and unless Somaliland has: (a) executed the 
Somaliland Subsidiary Agreement setting forth implementation 
arrangements for Somaliland’s Respective Activities under the 
Project (including the flow of funds out of the Grant proceeds), and 
all Somaliland’s internal requirements for the agreement to be 
binding upon Somaliland in accordance with its terms have been 
duly obtained/secured; (b) prepared and formally adopted the 
Somaliland Manual for its Respective Activities under the Project; 
and (c) established the institutional arrangements set forth in the 
foregoing manual, as shall be required to carrying out its Respective 
Activities under the Project, in a manner and substance satisfactory 
to the Association. 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 90  
     
 
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
 
1. 
The World Bank is supporting Somalia to improve its institutions and service delivery with a view to 
renewing the social contract. This is part of a broader effort to build state legitimacy and reduce institutional 
fragmentation. For Somali citizens to be willing to contribute to public revenues, they must trust in the state’s 
capability to discharge its basic functions and deliver public services. A similar trust is required to boost external 
funding for essential services and humanitarian support, such as for drought and famine, and to channel such 
funding via government institutions and systems. This requires, on the one hand, bolstering the institutional 
capacity of the state, and on the other hand, addressing fragmentation and strengthening transparency and 
accountability in managing public resources. The proposed operation will assist Somali governments by focusing 
on synergies and interconnectedness between improving domestic revenue mobilization (DRM), public financial 
management (PFM), and public service management (PSM).1  Integration of revenue, expenditure, and service 
delivery will in time improve formal tax collection, strengthen legitimacy, and reduce the role of non-state actors. 
This operation consolidates the World Banks’s efforts and will do so in the context of the whole of the Somali 
peninsula, aiming for a consistent reform agenda across the Somali governments while customizing its 
interventions to the needs of a given level of government.   
 
2. 
To achieve its objectives of strengthening institutional capacity, transparency, and accountability in 
managing public resources, this operation will build on the success of previous operations and strive to strike a 
balance between overall coordination at the federal level and implementation at the state levels. The project 
design manages the complexity of the operation by reflecting the lessons learned through the World Bank’s recent 
engagement in Somalia. It establishes coordination mechanisms at different levels, engages closely with all 
stakeholders, and balances the advanced and ambitious governance agenda of the government with the 
requirements and challenges of a fragile, conflict-affected, and violent (FCV) environment. To achieve consistency, 
harmonization, economies of scale, and interoperability in managing public resources, the project is designed to 
work across Somali governments.  At the same time, the FCV environment dictates a focus on communication, 
flexibility, additional support through World Bank-executed technical assistance, and enhanced supervision. As a 
result of this operation, domestic revenue collections will increase and the citizens will benefit from greater 
government responsiveness, more accessible government administrative services, and improved public 
administration. In the medium to long term, because of improvements in planning, budgeting, and cash flow in 
the health and education sectors, citizens will enjoy better delivery of health and education services. 
 
A. Country Context 
 
3. 
Somalia has a historic opportunity to turn the page on decades of conflict, fragility and state 
fragmentation, and improve its trajectory toward poverty reduction and inclusive growth. For over two decades, 
Somalia experienced protracted conflict and fragility, accompanied by the collapse of public sector institutions, 
basic public services and the social contract, resulting in the impoverishment of millions. The 2012 Provisional 
Constitution established a federal political structure, including a parliament, the Federal Government of Somalia 
(FGS) and the Federal Member States (FMSs) of Somalia. Somalia also successfully undertook three peaceful 
electoral processes at the federal level – in 2012, 2017, and 2022. Although much remains to be done to stabilize 
the country and secure a lasting political settlement, the sustained political, economic and institutional reforms 
 
1 This operation refers to public resource management, which includes the management of public financial resources – both revenues 
(DRM) and expenditures (PFM) -- as well as the management of human resources (PSM). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 90  
     
 
already undertaken have succeeded in rebuilding core state capabilities. These reforms have been supported by 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), European Union (EU) and World Bank Group (WBG) , including extensive 
technical assistance (TA).  
 
4. 
The long-term growth of the Somali economy continues to be held back by various shocks. Upon 
reaching the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative Decision Point milestone in 2020, growth was 
projected at 3.2 percent. However, numerous shocks such as the Corona Virus Disease (COVID-19), floods, and a 
desert locust infestation caused an economic contraction of 0.3 percent in 2020. While there was a modest 
economic recovery in 2021, with growth estimated at 2.9 percent, severe drought and famine conditions are 
emerging, which are contributing to high levels of food insecurity (affecting 7.1 million people) and internal 
displacement. Growth in 2022 is projected at 2.2 percent, below the population growth rate of 2.9 percent. 
Furthermore, inflation is projected at 8.5 percent in 2022 as global commodity prices increase and domestic 
agricultural production falls. Expected improvements in business confidence, the implementation of new 
investments in infrastructure and human capital, robust remittances, and social protection measures to support 
the poorest are expected to support economic recovery, with growth projected at around 3.6 percent in the 
medium term.    
 
5. 
Poverty remains widespread and deep. Somalia is one of the poorest countries in the world with a real 
per capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of US$404 in 2021 and with 69 percent of the population estimated to 
live below the poverty line (US$1.90 a day in purchasing power parity terms).2 Almost 9 of 10 Somali households 
are deprived of at least one fundamental dimension of well-being: monetary, electricity, education, or water and 
sanitation. Access to services is particularly limited for those living in rural areas, including nomads and internally 
displaced settlements, where poverty is deepest and markets, health clinics and schools are scarce.3 Moreover, 
the recent shocks, including the impacts of COVID-19, severe drought, and the war in Ukraine, are placing 
additional pressure on the poor. The worsening drought conditions are estimated to have led to nearly 50 percent 
of the population being food insecure and one million people displaced from their homes as rural dwellers seek 
access to food and basic services in urban areas.   
 
6. 
Somalia’s fiscal situation is challenging, offering limited opportunities to respond to the multiple crises. 
DRM has improved from a low base, nearly doubling from 2016 to 2021. However, it is still one of the lowest in 
the world with the FGS’s revenue to GDP ratio at only 3 percent4 Progress in improving revenue collection is 
uneven across the Federation. Trade-related taxes dominate revenues for regions, with ports (Mogadishu, 
Jubbaland, and Puntland) accounting for over two-thirds of total taxes collected in these regions in 2020. The 
remaining FMSs are dependent on intergovernmental transfers, although these are currently not based on clear 
and transparent criteria. Meanwhile, public expenditures continue rising, dominated by personnel costs. Between 
2016 and 2021, public expenditures have nearly tripled in nominal terms5. The wage bill accounts for half of total 
expenditures. Expenditures are currently dominated by security and administration, as basic government 
 
2 World Bank Group. 2019. Somali Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment: Findings from Wave 2 of the Somali High Frequency Survey. World 
Bank, Washington, DC. 
3 World Bank Group. 2019. Somali Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment: Findings from Wave 2 of the Somali High Frequency Survey. World 
Bank, Washington, DC. 
4 World Bank Group. 2022. Somalia Economic Update: Investing in Social Protection to Boost Resilience for Economic Growth. World Bank, 
Washington DC. https://doi.org/10.1596/38206 
5 World Bank Group. 2022. Collection of Policy Notes for the New Somali Government: Unlocking Somalia’s Potential to Stabilize, Grow 
and Prosper. World Bank, Washington DC. © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/37709 License: CC BY 
3.0 IGO 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 90  
     
 
functions are established. Over time, it will be important to increase the fiscal space for economic and social 
priorities so that expenditures support economic growth and poverty reduction. 
 
7. 
The institutional arrangements for intergovernmental relations are emerging between FGS and FMS at 
different speeds, pointing to the need for greater harmonization. Each member state collects and retains its 
taxes, supplemented by transfers from the FGS and direct official development assistance (ODA). Public finance 
administrations, operational systems, and policies among the FGS and FMSs are fragmented, creating 
inefficiencies and hampering the state-building process. However, progress has been made in defining the 
respective functional responsibilities of the federal and member state governments in several areas, such as in 
the division of functions and assignment of revenues, and the development of harmonized accounting and 
reporting structures. Further harmonization of the key public resource management systems is critical to cement 
the emerging inter-governmental fiscal settlement. 
 
8. 
Addressing broader challenges will require continuing the reform momentum, anchored in the HIPC 
initiative. Somalia qualified for the HIPC Decision Point milestone in March 2020, which opened access to regular 
concessional resources from IDA and other international financial institutions (IFIs), together with the investment 
of private capital from the International Finance Corporation.6 Somalia is currently in the HIPC interim period7, 
and only upon reaching the HIPC Completion Point milestone the country will be eligible for full and irrevocable 
debt relief. Somalia prepares for future financing opportunities by strengthening institutions and government 
capacity. Sustaining a positive trajectory will require predictable financing and improved institutions (among other 
factors) as numerous challenges remain, such as weak government capacity, asymmetric federal structures, 
security concerns, human capital deficits, and low levels of state legitimacy. 
 
9. 
Despite producing low levels of emissions, Somalia is acutely susceptible to climate change and 
resultant shocks due to its geographic setting, with nascent institutions aimed at achieving “climate-proof 
economic growth.” Climate projections for Somalia generally show that Somalia will experience both higher 
average air temperatures and “very hot” days until 2080 (Weathering Risk, 2022).8 The British Met Office’s 
projections for the larger East Africa region shows high confidence in a projected increase in average annual 
temperatures of 1.5-3.5˚C in the 2050s relative to the 1981-2010 baseline under a high emissions scenario, and 
temperatures are projected to increase in all months of the year (Richardson et al., 2022).  According to ND-GAIN 
matrix, Somalia is the 2nd most vulnerable country and the 120th most ready country. Somalia’s current 
greenhouse gas emissions are estimated to be 53.70 MtCO2eq, which represents less than 0.03 percent of total 
global emissions.9  Agriculture, including crop production and livestock husbandry remains key to the livelihoods 
of the majority of Somalia's population that lives in rural areas. It is also key to the country's food security and 
economic growth prospects. Up to 60 percent of the population are nomadic or semi-nomadic pastoralists 
(Jalango et al., 2021).10  Agriculture, the largest driver of the economy, accounts for 65 percent of GDP (IFAD, 
2021).11  The agriculture and livestock sub-sectors contribute about 5 and 43 percent to GDP, respectively, and 
 
6 https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2020/03/25/somalia-to-receive-debt-relef-under-the-enhanced-hipc-initiative  
7 HIPC interim period started in March 2020 and its ongoing until completion point is reached. There is no set date for completion as it is 
contingent upon completing pre-agreed reforms.  
8 Weathering Risk. 2022. Climate Risk Profile: Somalia.  
9 Federal Government of Somalia. 2021. Updated Nationally Determined Contributions 
10 Jalango D., Jaquet, S., Schiek, B., Belli, A., Ghosh, A., Hickson, K., Achicanoy, A., Esquivel, A., Saavedra, C., Schapendonk, F., Pacillo, G., 
Ramirez-Villegas, J., Grosjean, G. 2021. WFP Critical Corporate Initiative: Climate Response Analysis Somalia. The Alliance of Bioversity 
and The International Center for Tropical Agriculture; World Food Programme.  
11 International Fund for Agricultural Development. 2021. Somalia Country Strategy Note (2022-2023).  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 90  
     
 
about 80 percent of export earnings. Somalia is at risk of natural hazards, including drought, floods, cyclones, and 
climate-related diseases and epidemics.  
 
10. 
The Ninth Somalia National Development Plan (NDP 9 2020-2024) identifies environmental and climate 
change as one of the most critical drivers of poverty.  In 2020, the Directorate of Environment and Climate Change 
published a Somalia National Climate Change Policy. However, the governance and institutional architecture 
related to climate-informed budgeting, climate-smart public investment management, etc. has not been fully 
established. In the meantime, a mechanism is in place to enable coordination among national government 
agencies on climate strategy and policy. An inter-ministerial National Climate Change Committee sets the strategic 
priorities for the country in managing climate change while a new federal Ministry of Environment and Climate 
Change has been set up that is in charge of the implementation of these priorities. 
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
11. 
Somali governments have embarked on a broad reform agenda in the areas of public finances and public 
sector management. Several successes in this reform agenda, such as an updated legal and policy framework, 
automation, large and medium taxpayer offices and taxpayer identification in operation, and functional reviews 
completed in selected ministries, departments and agencies, have laid a solid foundation and set the stage for the 
next phase. Reform priorities have been identified in governments’ strategy documents such as FGS’s Public 
Financial Management Reform Action Plan (PFM RAP), the Somaliland Strategy for Public Finance Management 
Reform 2020–2024, and the National Public Administration Reform Strategy Framework (NPARSF), as well as in 
World Bank diagnostics such as the DRM12 and PFM13 diagnostics carried out under the DRM and PFM modules of 
the programmatic Public Expenditure Review (P160458) and the Somalia Customs Support ASA (P172650) . 
 
Revenue and Expenditure Trends Impacting Public Resource Management  
 
12. 
Somalia’s fiscal federalism is nascent, but progress has been made for FMSs to assume more functional 
responsibilities, with corresponding increases in their resource envelope. Notwithstanding the current lack of 
overarching agreements on the distribution of functional assignments between the federal and state levels and a 
clear intergovernmental fiscal formula for the distribution of resources, recent developments have helped put in 
place the critical building blocks for Somalia to move forward in this area. Consequent to the increase in 
responsibilities at the FMSs level, fiscal transfers more than doubled between 2018 and 2020, from US$30 million 
to US$80.30 million.14  Regular transfers have grown and stabilized between FGS and FMS especially on salaries 
for civil servants, teachers, and female health workers, supported by the Recurrent Costs and Reform Financing 
Project (P173731). Additionally, an interim agreement was also reached in 2020 to share World Bank’s budgetary 
support funding between the FGS and the FMSs on a 60:40 basis. As these trends continue, the fiscal envelope is 
expected to further increase in the coming years. This also brings public resource management challenges in FMSs 
to the fore.  
 
 
12 The World Bank Group. 2021. Domestic Resource Mobilization in Somalia (Report # P151540). World Bank, Washington DC.  
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/121391596804622057/pdf/Domestic-Resource-Mobilization-in-Somalia.pdf; Somalia 
Transport Costs Study; Somalia Customs Compliance Study; Somalia Domestic Revenue Mobilization Organizational Structures and 
Staffing Review.  
13 Somalia PFM assessment June 2020. 
14 This includes the Benadir Region. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 90  
     
 
13. 
Domestic revenues have been steadily increasing but are insufficient to finance growing expenditures.15 
FGS almost doubled its revenues from US$114 million in 2015 to US$225 million in 2021, due to ongoing reforms 
and institutional capacity building. This success has partially resulted from the preparation of evidence-based 
reports for informed policy decisions, the establishment and operation of the Large and Medium Taxpayer Offices, 
the issuance of taxpayer identification numbers using the Financial Management Information System (FMIS), and 
the continuous training of tax officials. Yet, FGS’s tax to GDP ratio is estimated at only 2.2 percent in 2021, low 
compared to an average of 18.6 percent across the Sub-Saharan African region from 2015 to 2019. Key reasons 
behind the under-performance include the legacy and a dependence on donors that developed after 
independence. Somalia is also primarily pastoralist and clan based, which resulted in a mistrust in the government 
and a minimal tax culture. The current system is also marked by informal taxation, fragmentation, and dated legal 
frameworks. Consequently, around half of total budget expenditures in 2021 were financed from external grants 
(Figure 1).  
 
14. 
The main revenue source for Somalia continues to be international trade. This mainly stems from the 
largest ports in FGS, Puntland State of Somalia (PSS), Jubbaland State of Somalia (JSS) and Somaliland (SL), 
resulting in the strong heterogeneity of revenue collection and potential between the states. Conversely, states 
without ports, such as Hirshabelle State of Somalia (HSS), Galmudug State of Somalia (GSS), and Southwest State 
of Somalia (SWSS), receive their main revenue from road-user taxes and fiscal transfers from the FGS. This 
heterogeneity in revenue sources is also reflected in the different revenue levels. In 2020, 64 percent of the total 
consolidated revenues of Somalia were collected by the FGS, 25 percent by PSS, 8 percent by JSS, and the 
remaining 3 percent from SWSS, GSS, and HSS.  
 
Figure 1. FGS revenue and expenditure trends, US$ million 
 
Source: Somalia FGS Ministry of Finance (https://mof.gov.so/fiscal/); World Bank and IMF forecasts 
(February 2022). 
 
15. 
FGS and all FMSs except PSS spend more than half of total expenditures on the public wage bill, which 
is largely driven by the security sector. The FGS wage bill, including security and non-formalized payroll and 
allowances, is consistently rising (Figure 2) and currently stands at a record high of 61 percent of total spending in 
2021. While the size of the civil service is small as a share of the population,16 the civil service wage bill as a share 
of total public expenditures is large because of low domestic revenue collection. Non-security civil service 
 
15 Net Official Development Assistance (ODA) stood at US$3.04 billion in 2020 according to OECD data. 
16 For example, the 2018 HR Audit counted 4,799 civil servants on the official FGS payroll and 5,588 in the nine regions of Puntland. 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022f
2023f
2024f
Taxes, Fees & Customs
Grants
Total expenditure
Wages
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 90  
     
 
employment has largely stabilized in the last few years, meaning that the modest increases in the overall non-
security sector wage bill of late almost certainly reflect the reallocation of staff across grades, from lower to higher 
grades. Consequently, the wage bill is crowding out fiscal space for development activities and a significant portion 
of such activities is externally financed, posing important fiscal sustainability risks. The recently completed Human 
Resources (HR) audits constitute a major step toward wage bill control, as ghost workers are being removed from 
the payroll in FGS, PSS, and SL.17 
 
Figure 2. FGS wage bill trends (US$) 
 
 
Source: Abyrint  
 
16. 
The lack of functioning civil service pension systems and a mandatory retirement age contributes 
significantly to both the large wage bill and the shortage of skills in the civil service. A growing number of public 
servants are reaching retirement age but staying on in the system due to the lack of an exit strategy such as a clear 
pension scheme. There are no mechanisms for providing adequate income for civil servants who become disabled, 
and for their survivors if they die. Despite progress in developing civil service pension policies in FGS, PSS and SL, 
implementation has not been possible due to the lack of a legal framework. The other FMSs have no pension 
systems in place.  The absence of pension schemes, inter alia, is jeopardizing wage bill sustainability and the quality 
of services as a significant number of “premium” jobs remain occupied by less educated and productive 
individuals. Similarly, given that the security sector consumes over 35 percent of expenditures, a clear exit strategy 
for security personnel reaching retirement age is required, as this will free up the limited slots for the most suitable 
applicants.   
 
17. 
Although efforts to make capacity improvements have encountered difficulties, some progress is now 
being achieved. The sub-optimal level of skilled staff has affected fiscal management capacity and the capacity to 
analyze the fiscal implications of policies. While HR policies and plans18 have been developed in the past to 
improve capacity, implementation has been inconsistent due to the lack of attention to the fiscal impact of these 
policies. The urgency to implement these HR policies including a formal pay and grading system is further driven 
by the growing non-formalized payroll and allowances. Despite these challenges, a good starting point to 
structured civil service reforms has been established. Organizational reviews have been undertaken in FGS, PSS, 
and SL, and mandates, vision, governance structures, technology, and staffing needs have been determined. 
Skilled staff have been recruited in selected ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs) in FGS and PSS. 
Specialized training has been provided to these new recruits. The policy coordination and oversight capacity of 
 
17 Though the ghost worker incidence found in the HR audits was low. 
18 This includes recruitment, schemes of service, career progression, performance management, etc.    
 -
 100,000,000
 200,000,000
 300,000,000
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
 Total wage bill incl security
 Total non-security wage bill (Object 21)
 Gross payroll - formalized civil service
 Baseline RCRF financing of civil service
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 90  
     
 
the centers of government in FGS, PSS and SL were also strengthened through capacity development in policy 
analysis and implementation, improving cabinet business processes, and clarifying roles within the structures in 
policy coordination.  
 
Budget Credibility  
 
18. 
Budget as a tool for policy implementation is weak. There are variances between the original budget and 
the actual expenditures, undermining budget credibility. Low expenditure outturns are primarily the result of low 
revenue outturns, especially in the FMSs. In this tight fiscal environment, reform efforts are ongoing to improve 
the central budget and cash management functions, including strengthening the program classification of the 
budget and improving the cash management function at the FGS treasury. The bottom-up capacity to meaningfully 
contribute to these central functions is still weak.  
  
19. 
Accurate forecasting of domestic revenues has also been challenging in view of the lack of modern 
management practices and low capacity. Unrealistic fiscal frameworks, resulting from low institutional and 
human capacity, have led to budget cuts during implementation. Although human resource management (HRM) 
practices relevant to DRM are embedded in the respective civil service policies and procedures, most of these 
procedures remain unimplemented and inconsistent across the MDAs. The FGS and PSS completed training needs 
assessments of DRM staff in 2021, which indicate significant knowledge and skill gaps among staff. 
 
20. 
The large shortfall in the externally financed portion of the budget exacerbates the issue of low revenue 
outturns. The Somali governments control only about half of the revenues, while the balance is externally 
financed, and the portion of externally funded revenues has been increasing steadily over time. However, in 2021 
only 55 percent of the revenue budget was met and the bulk of the revenue shortfall relates to external 
revenues.19 Poor information sharing of planned donor operations during budget preparation and weak 
implementation of results-based financing operations have contributed to this shortfall.    
 
Accountability 
 
21. 
Foundational elements of accountability in public resource management have been put in place through 
strengthening the legal and regulatory framework. For example, the legal framework for the civil service is in 
place and the FGS, SL, and most FMSs have adopted modernized PFM Acts.20 Furthermore, enactment of the 
Public Procurement, Disposal & Concessions Act and adoption of public procurement regulations have also been 
significant achievements. However, capacity to implement the procurement regulations is a concern, explained 
by the substantial centralized procurement at the Federal level. Finally, Audit Acts that provide independence to 
the external audit function, which is a key element to ensure accountability in the use of public resources, are in 
place in most FMSs. However, the Audit Act for the FGS passed in 2020 is still awaiting ratification. 
 
22. 
Key internal and external audit reforms have helped improve oversight and accountability. The internal 
audit function has been established and strengthened by developing audit charters and manuals. At the FMSs 
level, the audit function is also operational, though the follow-up processes are not being fully practiced. 
 
19 The variances arise from the investment funding operations that did not materialize in 2021, specifically the Development Policy 
Operation (see para. 38). The execution rate of recurrent cost financing is high, and therefore the under-execution does not affect the day-
to-day functions of the government. 
20 PSS’s PFM Act is in the process of being adopted. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 90  
     
 
Substantial further efforts will be required to implement the internal audit charters and manuals and strengthen 
management capacity to follow up and implement audit recommendations. As a result of continuous external 
audit capacity building, the Offices of the Auditors General (OAGs) have been gradually taking over from private 
sector auditors the function of external audit of public finances, thereby strengthening the independent oversight 
of public finances. They are also moving toward implementing International Standards for Supreme Audit 
Institutions to improve the quality of audits. However, the delays in carrying out audits and the level of 
implementation of audit recommendations are continuing concerns. To improve the efficiency and effectiveness 
of audits, OAGs aim to convert manual processes to automated ones, engage in effective communication with 
stakeholders, establish sound quality assurance processes, and strive to ensure audits are completed on time.  
 
23. 
Tax compliance is being strengthened through taxpayers’ access to information about turning revenue 
into public services, as well as through tax education and facilitation; these developments are contributing to 
better accountability and represent a significant opportunity to improve revenue collection. Somalia’s formal 
DRM institutions are much less trusted than traditional or communal authorities, which reflects dissatisfaction 
among Somalis, especially traders, with the lack of accountability of the state in managing public resources. 21  Low 
legitimacy and poor perception by the citizenry create persistent difficulties for formal institutions regarding tax 
collection. The operationalization of the Revenue Academy at Mogadishu, which has promoted citizen 
engagement by providing taxpayer education,22 is a significant step towards improving both accountability and 
revenue collection.  
 
24. 
The existence of implementation gaps in the processes and regulations for recruitment, training, and 
performance management allows for political interference. While the policy specifies that recruitment should 
be merit-based, it is often influenced by power-sharing agreements that result in decisions influenced by clan 
affiliation. The influence of clan and politics also plays a role in performance evaluations, promotions, training, 
and deployment. 
 
Transparency 
 
25. 
The Ministry of Finance (MoF) has made political commitments and operational progress towards 
improving budget transparency since the first Open Budget Survey (OBS)23 was published in 2017. Somalia’s OBS 
ranking and score is among the lowest in the latest OBS report.24 According to the survey, there is no public 
participation in fiscal activities and significant weaknesses in budget oversight and fiscal transparency.  Reform 
measures are being undertaken on: (i) the preparation and publication of budget strategy papers, which lay out 
the medium-term fiscal outlook and priorities and are presented to the cabinets of Ministers ahead of the 
executive budget; (ii) the preparation of a mid-year budget analysis by the FGS; (iii) the improved timeliness of in-
year budget execution reports; and (iv) the preparation and publication of citizens budgets. To further improve 
budget transparency, the Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reforms Financing Project (RCRF) Phase III (P173731) 
outlines a systematic and strategic approach to ensuring that the budget documents measured by OBS are 
prepared and published in a timely manner, at the FGS level.   
 
26. 
Although the foundational elements of fiscal reporting have been established in the FGS, FMSs and SL, 
 
21 Dom, Khan, Lomme, and Fiebelkorn (2021), Somalia Customs Compliance Study: assessing enforcement, facilitation, and trust. 
22 In this regard, the FGS and PSS have led taxpayer engagement activities, which will be expanded to JSS, GSS, SWSS, and HSS. 
23 https://www.internationalbudget.org/open-budget-survey/about. 
24 https://www.internationalbudget.org/open-budget-survey/country-results. 2021 Open Budget Survey Report. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 90  
     
 
further improvements can be made to increase the value of such reporting. FGS, FMSs and SL prepare quarterly 
budget execution reports in a timely manner and publish them on their websites. In addition, the FGS prepares 
regular in-year consolidated fiscal reports. Moreover, the Somali governments have aligned their year-end 
financial reports with cash-basis international standards to provide information in a structured format. FGS has 
also commenced preparing ministry-level financial statements. The professionalization25 of staff and continuous 
on-the-job support have been key underpinnings for these achievements. Building on these reforms, to strengthen 
the usefulness of these reports as a decision-making support tool, further improvements are needed to increase 
the comparability of these reports with the approved budgets, capture commitment information and other 
information such as receivables and payables, and obtain an in-depth understanding of the variances. Besides the 
publication of the citizens budget report, no forums or platforms are available to improve either citizens’ 
engagement in public finance or their absorptive capacity to digest the information provided to them. 
 
Harmonization 
 
27. 
The success of current efforts to harmonize inland revenue and customs systems is vital to strengthen 
the country’s DRM institutions. At present, inland revenue as well as trade taxes are collected and spent 
separately by the FGS and the FMSs, and in practice six stand-alone inland revenue and three customs 
administrations operate. Each member state has adapted its own version of the Customs Act of 1961 as well as 
inland revenue legislation, and collects and retains its own taxes, along with various fees. Whereas some tax 
instruments may be considered as transitional for the FMSs, numerous tax instruments are imposed in both the 
FGS and FMSs, creating potential tax competition, multiple taxation, and high compliance costs for the private 
sector. New opportunities have emerged for harmonization of customs and inland revenue systems, resulting 
from the FGS and FMSs dialogue at the Intergovernmental Fiscal Forum (IGFF) supported by Somalia Recurrent 
Cost and Reforms Financing Project (RCRF) Phase III (P173731). The IGFF engages the Finance Ministers and 
technical staff across Somalia. The IGFF has constituted a DRM Committee in 2022 comprising the FGS and FMSs 
revenue director generals, which the proposed project will support. Also, the Somalia Customs Support Advisory 
Services and Analytics Project (SCSP ASA - P172650), which is funded by the Norwegian Agency for Development 
Cooperation (Norad) through the World Bank’s Global Tax Program, will complement this project with a technical 
advisory for informed decision making. This harmonization dialogue on customs and inland revenue reforms aims 
to strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of their DRM institutions. To this end, the FGS, PSS and JSS are 
leading the preparation of a Medium-Term Revenue Strategy (2022-2026) supported by the WBG. 
 
28. 
Harmonization of reporting practices is key to obtaining a consolidated picture of the country’s fiscal 
position. FGS, FMSs, and SL have adopted the Government Finance Statistics Manual (GFSM) 2014 and are moving 
towards harmonizing their charts of accounts around it; common reporting formats are being used; and 
consolidation of fiscal reports is taking place. To consolidate FGS and FMSs fiscal reports more efficiently, it will 
be essential to move away from the current laborious and manual consolidation processes, improve the 
interoperability of FMISs to make way for an automated process, and agree upon institutional processes to 
continuously maintain a harmonized coding and reporting structure. A roadmap is being prepared by the 
Government to move towards smooth reporting of the consolidated fiscal position.   
 
29. 
Harmonization of the foundational underpinnings of public sector institutions, such as HRM laws, 
policies, regulations, and systems, will be important in the next phase of reforms. For example, pay and grading 
 
25 In-country PFM staff professionalization program through a twinning arrangement between the United Kingdom’s Chartered Institute 
of Public Finance and Accountancy and local Somali universities. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 90  
     
 
(P&G) systems have commenced, but the methodologies are not consistent, including a fiscal sustainability check. 
A harmonized methodology should be rolled out to all jurisdictions. The P&G methodology should be sufficiently 
robust to provide a sound justification on the differences found in pay grades between FGS and FMSs, to suit the 
local context.26 The absence of a P&G system that allows for career and salary progression also contributes to 
payroll inflation and prevents the recruitment and retention of well-qualified personnel.  
 
Automation 
 
30. 
The automation of financial management in each individual Somali government is a key achievement. 
Reforms in FGS, FMSs and SL have led to the significantly improved use of FMISs. These systems have been 
instrumental in ensuring the integrity of financial information and a key tool for implementing the internal control 
framework. Key milestones include use of the FMISs for government staff payroll, and automated banking 
instructions in FGS, which improved the integrity of the payment system. Moreover, the FMISs are used for 
financial reporting, including generation of in-year budget reports, annual financial reports, and other ad hoc 
reports that may be requested. As FGS, FMSs and SL move to the next level of reforms and automation becomes 
more ingrained, some of the parallel processes require a gradual weaning out. Business processes will also need 
to be revisited to check for comprehensiveness, relevance, and efficiency in today’s context. The next phase of 
reforms will also include enhanced usage of the system by MDAs, improvements in functionalities to capture 
critical information such as commitments, and enhanced governance of the system for improved security and 
sustainability.   
 
31. 
There has been progress in automating DRM and HRM systems. The taxpayer registry was on paper until 
2019, when it was linked to the FMIS in FGS. A longer-term solution, an Integrated Tax Administration Automation 
System (ITAS), is underway. A critical tool to strengthen DRM capacity, it will become available in 2023. Progress 
has also been made in establishing Human Resource Management Information Systems (HRMISs). FGS and 
Puntland are in the process of procuring a system and the rest of the FMSs have HRMISs in place. These systems 
will be a key tool for implementing HR rules and regulations. The next phase of reforms should also focus on the 
upgrades in HRMISs that are required to address the needs of the pension systems that are being developed.  
 
32. 
While key public finance and human resource management systems have been developed or are under 
development, they remain fragmented and are not yet interoperable. HRMISs, for instance, are not integrated 
with FMISs, thereby increasing the risks of errors and fraud in payroll processing. Specifically, there is currently no 
Information Technology (IT) platform, for example a government service bus for automating secure data 
exchange, and no policy or roadmap for location-specific shared platforms (shared data centers/cloud hosting, 
shared service bus). As a result, coverage of systems is limited, exchange of information does not occur, and 
consolidated reports that could enable informed decision making on DRM, PFM, and Public Sector Management 
(PSM) are not prepared.  
 
Gender Gaps in Skills and Employment 
 
33. 
The public sector reflects gender gaps in skills and employment that exist across Somalia. According to 
the National Development Plan (NDP) 9, the unemployment rate among women is high and women are hindered 
by a mismatch between their jobs and skills. Women represent 56 percent of the population and generate up to 
 
26 FGS salaries are between US$200-US$735 (excluding the Director/DG allowance of US$400, US$500/month); Puntland, US$80 -US$500 
(excluding the allowance for senior management); and FMS pay ranges from US$150-US$1,285 (no allowance). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 90  
     
 
70 percent of household income but are under-represented in the formal labor force, with a participation rate of 
43 percent.27 Similarly, at the FGS, women make up only 26 percent of the total formalized civil service workforce 
and only 19 percent of the two highest grade levels.28 In the FMSs, female civil servants make up 15.5 percent of 
the workforce in SWSS, 3.8 percent in JSS, 28 percent in PSS, 4.5 percent in HSS, and 25 percent in GSS. A 2021 
National Civil Service Commission report identified the following barriers to female employment: (i) lack of a 
gender equity employment law; (ii) cultural barriers; (iii) clan and political barriers; (iv) skills and knowledge gaps; 
(v) non-meritocratic promotions; and (vi) lack of female role models in senior public service positions. Planned 
and well-targeted public sector reforms could begin to address these issues in the public sector. 
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
 
34. 
The project contributes to the World Bank Group’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting 
shared prosperity. The project is aligned with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the 
Federal Republic of Somalia (FY19 – FY22) (Report No. 124734-SO)29, discussed by the Board on September 25, 
2018. The Performance and Learning Review (Report No. 176049)30 extended the CPF through FY23. The project 
is aligned with the World Bank Group Strategy for Fragility, Conflict and Violence 2020 – 2025 (Report 
No.146551)31. Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (SERP) aligns with CPF Focus Area 1: 
Strengthening Institutions to Deliver Services and, as such, is a fundamental instrument for state building. Through 
a joined-up approach to governance reforms that addresses PFM, DRM, and public sector performance, the 
project supports the third FCV pillar, which entails strengthening the capacity and legitimacy of core institutions 
and renewing the social contract.  
 
35. 
The project is aligned with the four pillars of the World Bank Group Crisis Response Framework (GCRF, 
Report No 174677)32. The project interventions contribute mainly to Pillar 4 — Strengthening Policies, Institutions 
and Investments for Rebuilding Better (supporting thematic areas ‘climate smart policies & incentives, PFM & 
DRM, health and education, strengthening institutional & capacity building, digital development) by strengthening 
institutional capacity and systems for PFM, DRM and civil service management for sustainable reforms. The SERP 
also contributes to: Pillar 1 of the GCRF – Responding to Food Insecurity (thematic areas ‘sustainable food and 
nutrition security) by strengthening the systems and management of public funds directed towards mitigating the 
multiple crises faced by Somalia including food insecurity. Pillar 2 - Protecting People and Jobs (thematic area 
‘vaccination & routine health and Gender equality’) by strengthening PFM in the health and education sectors for 
effective service delivery and facilitating the recruitment of qualified female professionals into technical and 
decision-making roles in the civil service. Pillar 3 – Strengthening Resilience to be better prepared for any future 
crisis and challenge (thematic areas ‘climate resilience’) by mainstreaming climate–informed Public Investment 
Management (PIM) for capital projects.  
 
 
27 Somalia Country Economic Memorandum, World Bank (2021). 
28 Report On Women Promotion Covering the Benchmark and the Entire Progress Achieved as per The NCSC Gender-Related Guidelines, 
National Civil Service Commission (2021). 
29 https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-reports/documentdetail/941361537906125793/somalia-country-
partnership-framework-for-the-period-fy19-fy22 
30 PLR https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/search/33911410 
31 https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/fragilityconflictviolence/publication/world-bank-group-strategy-for-fragility-conflict-and-
violence-2020-2025 
32 https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-
reports/documentdetail/099640108012229672/idu09002cbf10966704fa00958a0596092f2542c 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 90  
     
 
36. 
The project is also aligned with key government strategic documents and directions. Somalia’s NDP9 
covering 2020–2024 sets out national priorities in five main areas; the project supports Pillar 1 (Institution 
Building), Pillar 4 (Social and Human Development), and the reforms highlighted in the chapter on the Macro-
Economic and Fiscal Framework. The project also addresses the governance cross-cutting imperative, which states 
that all pillars of NDP9 should include activities that strengthen institutional capacity for effective governance.  In 
addition, in his inaugural address, the newly elected President of the Federal Republic of Somalia, Mr. Hassan 
Sheikh Mohamud, highlighted the need to strengthen the legitimacy of the state and build institutional capacity, 
as well as greater accountability and transparency in government finances. These goals are aligned with NDP9 and 
will also be directly supported by SERP. The project will also make critical contributions to FGS efforts to meet the 
HIPC triggers for the floating completion point through its DRM and PFM interventions.   
 
37. 
The project will also contribute to IDA20 commitments on universally accessible GovTech, which 
highlights access to services for all regardless of age, gender, ethnicity, and disability.  As a consequence of both 
fragility and the COVID-19 crisis, the country urgently requires the building of digital foundations for increased 
government resilience, integrity, coordination, transparency, and dialogue with citizens. The project supports the 
GovTech agenda through effective coordination towards an integrated architecture for digital government, 
disaster recovery, capacity building, change management, and design of user-centric digital government.  
 
38. 
The project will support and complement the Somalia RCRF in three major ways. First, SERP will support 
the achievement of the RCRF’s Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) through TA support, primarily those on 
strengthening domestic revenue mobilization, expenditure management, reporting, auditing, and the pension and 
pay and grading systems at the FGS and FMS levels. Second, RCRF will lead budget transparency efforts at the FGS 
level, and SERP will focus on FMSs and SL regarding key budget documentation, parliamentary scrutiny, and citizen 
engagement. SERP will also leverage the citizen engagement mechanisms under RCRF (call centers, mass media 
campaigns) for the FMSs. Third, SERP will help to strengthen PFM for education and health, which aligns with the 
RCRF’s investments in the governance of these sectors.   
 
39. 
The project also complements the Somalia Inclusive Growth Development Policy Operation series (DPO, 
P174889) by increasing the ability to exercise effective macro-fiscal management across Somalia and build trust 
that DPO funding will be spent effectively, efficiently, and transparently. As increased resources flow through 
government systems at the FGS and FMSs levels, it will be important to ensure that the fiduciary environment also 
improves. This is a focus area of SERP, which includes improvements to in-year reporting and internal and external 
audits. Moreover, the reforms supported in the project complement the reforms supported in the DPO. For 
example, while the DPO supports improvements to the audit process, e.g., the enactment of the Audit Bill and the 
timely publication of audit reports, the project strengthens the quality of the external audit function and supports 
the improved implementation of audit recommendations. Similarly, the DPO supports an improved 
intergovernmental transfer formula, while the project improves the interoperability of PFM, DRM, and PSM 
systems at FGS and the FMSs. This will help ensure improved consistency in how funds flow from the FGS to the 
regions and how these funds are accounted for. Importantly, the project supports greater collaboration between 
FGS and the FMSs, which is vital for trust-building and can support the broader objectives of the 
intergovernmental pillar of the DPO. 
 
40. 
In August 2022, the Inter-Agency Standing Committee activated the humanitarian system-wide Scale-
Up protocols in Somalia to support the ongoing drought and famine response. Total humanitarian support to 
that point stood at US$1.14 billion with the Government of Somalia and World Bank funding at US$333.9 million. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 90  
     
 
The scale-up will result in significant additional funding being channeled to Somalia with the World Bank expected 
to play an important role in improving resilience, expanding service delivery, and addressing drivers of 
vulnerability. To this end, SERP will work to increase the capacity, transparency, and accountability of public 
finances, which will be critical to these efforts as both the World Bank and United Nations (UN) are committed to 
using country systems.  
 
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 
A. Project Development Objective 
PDO Statement 
 
41. 
The objective is to strengthen accountability, transparency, and institutional capacity in public resource 
management, across participating entities. 
 
42. 
PDO Level Indicators 
• 
Implementation of previous years’ audit recommendations relevant to Ministries of Finance on 
the consolidated financial statements (percentage)  
• 
Time taken (from end of financial year) to publish annual audited financial statements (number 
of months) 
• 
New potential taxpayers identified and registered (percentage) 
• 
Implementation of budgeted staffing plans for technical positions in PFM, DRM and policy 
making functions33 (percentage)  
• 
Pilot service centers established and operational - SL (number) 
 
B. Project Components 
 
43. 
The project is expected to achieve the PDO through an innovative design to implement interdependent 
reforms in public resource management, in an integrated manner, across the whole of Somalia. The project is 
designed to leverage synergies between various reform elements and support them to work towards the common 
PDO in a symbiotic manner. It will introduce a coherent, consistent, and sustainable reform agenda for managing 
public finances and human resources. The improved outcomes of this integrated approach to reforms will 
contribute to greater trust in fiscal management. A new project coordination structure will be set up, 
commensurate with this design, for improved coordination among the various implementing agencies. The 
entities participating in the project are the Federal Government of Somalia, Galmudug State of Somalia, 
Hirshabelle State of Somalia, Jubbaland State of Somalia, Puntland State of Somalia, South West State of Somalia, 
and Government of Somaliland. A detailed breakdown of participating MDAs can be found in Annex 1 (Table A1: 
Responsible MDAs by Component). 
 
44. 
A single governance project that covers all of Somalia while combining PFM, DRM, and PSM is required 
to achieve improved outcomes, given the interdependencies. This project includes support for interoperable or 
shared systems across all three areas, which allows for improved information sharing and harmonized reporting. 
The project also addresses the need for broader structural civil service reforms and change management to 
 
33 These procedures are based on the civil service law, HR regulations, and procedures established through previous projects. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 90  
     
 
support the sustainability of DRM and PFM reforms (component 4). Furthermore, establishing a connection at the 
onset between PSM reforms and the fiscal framework in DRM and PFM will allow for an early assessment of the 
affordability of these reforms and create a pathway for successful implementation. In addition, two-way 
interdependencies exist between areas; for example, DRM reforms improve PFM budget credibility (please see 
Figure 5). Further benefits are accrued by bringing the FGS and FMSs together, as this allows for harmonization 
between the governments in the areas of PFM, DRM, and PSM, comprehensive fiscal reporting and transparency 
across Somalia, development of a consistent reform agenda, and cost-efficiency gains. The improved outcomes of 
this integrated approach to governance reforms will be the establishment of strong macro fiscal frameworks and 
greater trust in the management of public resources. It will also have the potential to result in increased access to 
additional donor financing. Table A2.1 in annex 2 provides an overview of the interventions mapped across 
common themes and reform areas.   
 
45. 
The project supports the strengthening of PFM, DRM, and PSM across Somalia through five 
components: 
 
• 
Component 1: Public Financial Management (US$22.5 million) 
• 
Component 2: Domestic Revenue Mobilization (US$26 million) 
• 
Component 3: Public Sector Management (US$14.5 million) 
• 
Component 4: Integrated Governance Support (US$4 million) 
• 
Component 5: Project Management, Coordination, and Support in Delivery (US$8million) 
46. 
The project allocation between FGS, FMSs, and SL is outlined in table 1. This 5-year project will be funded 
by an IDA grant of US$60 and co-financed by SMPF 2 for US$1534. All components are eligible for funding under 
both IDA and SMPF2 and the SMPF2 will be disbursed first prior to drawing down on IDA.    
 
Table 1: Allocation between components and FGS, FMSs, and SL (US$ millions) 
 Components 
Total 
FGS and 
FMSs 
SL 
PFM 
22.5 
17.42 
5.08 
DRM 
26.00 
19.50 
6.50 
PSM 
14.50 
12.50 
2.00 
Integrated Governance 
Support 
4.00 
3.08 
0.92 
Project Management 
8.00 
6.00 
2.00 
Total 
75.00 
58.50 
16.50 
  
 
34 The projects financed under the SMPF and SMPF 2 have adopted a portfolio wide strategy of tranching Grant Agreements for projects 
commensurate with the available cash flow. As the World Bank’s practice is to sign grant agreements on a cash basis, the 
budgets for most of the MPF projects have been tranched into a series of grants. Accordingly, the first SMPF 2 Grant Agreement is to be 
signed for US$5 million. The remaining US$10 million of the grant will become available in tranches starting from the first quarter of FY2024.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 90  
     
 
47. 
The project will include retroactive financing. This financing will not exceed US$5 million, in respect of 
payments made for eligible expenditures prior to the grant signing date but on or after November 1, 2022. This 
will include procurable expenditures and comply with the World Bank’s procurement and anti-corruption 
guidelines. The government has adequate internal controls in place to ensure that these expenses are incurred 
efficiently, effectively, and for intended purposes.  
  
48. 
The scope and substance of this project prioritizes reforms based on: (i) building on the gains made and 
lessons learnt through ongoing projects of the World Bank and other Development Partners (DPs); (ii) impact on 
revenue and expenditure; (iii) flexible solutions that fit local needs; (iv) urgent short-term needs that also lay a 
foundation for medium- to long-term institutional development; and (v) absorption capacity of the government 
entities.  
 
49. 
The project aims to build on several foundational reforms that have been put in place through previous 
and ongoing interventions. These interventions include the World Bank-administered Somalia Second Public 
Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (DRM & PFM Project P151492) supporting FGS, PSS, and 
SL; Somalia Capacity Injection Project (CIP P149971) supporting FGS and PSS; Somaliland Civil Service 
Strengthening Projects (CSSP P155123 and P174875); Somalia Customs Support Advisory Services and Analytics 
Project (P172650), funded by Norad through the World Bank Global Tax Program; Public Resource Management 
in Somalia (PREMIS) project funded by the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) and EU (GSS, 
HSS, JSS, and SWSS); Customs Reform and Trade Enhancement Somalia (CRATES) project (FGS, JSS, and PSS) 
funded by FCDO and EU; Prosperity from Revenue (PROFR) program funded by FCDO (SL); and EU budget support 
technical assistance. 
 
50. 
The project will finance: (i) goods; (ii) consulting and non-consulting services; (iii) civil works; (iv) 
consultations, workshops, and focus-group discussions; and (v) training. 
  
Component 1: Public Financial Management (US$22.50 million: FGS & FMSs US$17.42 million; SL US$5.08 
million) 
 
51. 
The overall objective of this component is to strengthen budget preparation, execution, and oversight 
for FGS, FMSs, and SL. The component contributes to all four pillars of the GCRF by strengthening public finance 
decision making and practices that contributes to addressing the immediate crises in Somalia, building resilience 
to face future crises and strengthening institutions.  It closely aligns with the FGS’s PFM Reform Action Plan (PFM 
RAP)35 and the Somaliland Strategy for Public Finance Management Reform 2020–2024. Initial prioritization will 
differentiate between the needs of states that have significant domestic revenue (FGS, PSS, JSS, and SL) and those 
that depend almost entirely on donor funding (GSS, HSS, and SWSS). Priority will be given to downstream budget 
execution processes for all governments, while for those with own domestic revenue, there will also be a focus 
on upstream processes (e.g., budgeting, planning). The project will support the efforts of FGS, FMSs, and SL to 
address PFM challenges through five subcomponents. Issues of capacity building, gender, and citizen engagement 
will be addressed in a cross-cutting manner. The subcomponents include:  
 
Subcomponent 1.1: Support essential budget execution functions (US$16.50 million: FGS & FMSs US$12.46 
million; SL US$4.04 million) 
 
35 SERP specifically aligns with PFM RAP objectives on 1. budget reliability, 2. transparency of public finances, 4. policy based fiscal strategy 
and budgeting, 5. predictability and control in budget execution, 6. accounting and reporting, and 7. external scrutiny and audit. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 90  
     
 
 
52. 
This subcomponent aims to strengthen the budget execution functions in FGS, FMSs, and SL. It will:  
 
(a) Strengthen and update the legal and internal control frameworks and business processes, especially to 
recognize the inter-governmental fiscal relations, improve risk management, eliminate cumbersome and 
duplicate processes, and enhance the quality, comprehensiveness, and transparency of financial 
reporting. Capacity will be enhanced by providing classroom and on-the-job support to implement the 
revamped controls and business processes. 
(b) Strengthen the functionalities, usage and security of the FMIS, a primary tool for budget management and 
financial reporting for public disclosure and management decision making. The work will be underpinned 
by an assessment of existing FMIS systems and a roadmap to implement the recommendations of the 
assessment, giving due attention to fiscal affordability and system sustainability as well as to the 
prospective integration of FMSs and FGS systems. Main areas of support include: (i) upgrading and 
expanding FMIS functionalities and their usage; (ii) developing or improving the governance, 
sustainability, disaster recovery and change management plans, and implementing those plans; (iii) 
improving the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure for data centers, storage, 
security, helpdesk and more; and (iv) providing extensive training to users and superusers.  
(c) Support the implementation of fundamental procurement reforms to improve controls, accountability, 
and transparency. These reforms include (i) establishing and operationalizing a public procurement 
authority, taking into account the fiscal and staffing implications, its roles and responsibilities, and the 
need to sensitize stakeholders; (ii) developing and operationalizing the procurement portal; (iii) 
developing and improving procurement documentation; (iv) building the capacity of civil servants 
(including obtaining the services of international training institutions to develop a procurement 
curriculum and modules, and deliver training of trainers); and (v) conducting periodic procurement 
reporting. 
(d) Improve monitoring and oversight by strengthening internal and external audit and the Public Accounts 
Committees36 of the Parliaments. Specifically, the subcomponent will (i) support internal auditors' 
capacity building as well as provide technical support to establish and operationalize audit committees to 
improve the follow-up on audit recommendations; (ii) support external audit capacity building, 
enhancement of methodologies, and improvement in physical infrastructure, including civil works, to 
conduct statutory and other types of audits as per international standards and on time; (iii) develop 
strategic plans and support the enhancement of the audit quality assurance, communication, human 
resource management, and IT functions; and (iv) strengthen the process and capacity of Finance/Public 
Accounts Committees to improve the quality, frequency, and reporting of parliament oversight of public 
finance. 
Subcomponent 1.2: Strengthen PFM in the health and education sectors (US$1.28 million: FGS & FMSs US$0.85 
million; SL US$0.43 million) 
 
53. 
This subcomponent aims to strengthen planning, budgeting, and controls in the health and education 
sectors, thus creating the enabling environment for effective service delivery. It will support the FGS, SL, PSS, 
and JSS to: (a) improve systems and capacity to establish a strong connection between the sector policies/plans 
with the resources allocated for these sectors in the Medium-Term Fiscal Framework (MTFF) to improve budget 
 
36 The role of a typical Public Accounts Committee is carried out by the Budget and Finance Committees in FGS, FMS and SL.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 90  
     
 
allocations to these sectors; (b) develop guidelines and build capacity to improve bottom-up planning and 
budgeting; (c) provide the capacity and automated tools for enhancing cash management practices at the sector 
level, with a view to ensuring a timely and adequate cash flow; and (d) improve compliance with rules by building 
the compliance monitoring capacity of internal auditors, audit committees, and procurement committees in these 
sectors. This subcomponent will be closely coordinated with the health and education sector activities of the RCRF 
project that supports FGS and FMSs education and health ministries.  
 
Subcomponent 1.3: Facilitate the harmonization of PFM systems between FGS and FMSs (US$0.67 million: FGS 
& FMSs US$0.67 million) 
 
54. 
This subcomponent aims to establish a coherent and well-coordinated PFM system across FGS and the 
FMSs. It will build capacity to support ongoing work to harmonize: (a) reporting and accounting structures and 
templates; (b) roadmaps to improve disclosures in financial statements in line with International Public Sector 
Accounting Standard (IPSAS); and (c) charts of accounts across the FMSs and FGS to build the foundation for 
consolidating fiscal information. As a second stage, it will automate the generation of consolidated financial 
statements and fiscal reports via interoperable systems. It will also support an assessment of the PFM Acts of FGS 
and FMSs governments to improve intergovernmental fiscal coordination.  
 
Subcomponent 1.4: Improve budget preparation and transparency (US$1.54 million: FGS & FMSs US$0.94 
million; SL US$0.61 million)   
 
55. 
This subcomponent aims to improve budget preparation processes, budget transparency, and public 
participation in the various stages of budgeting. It will: 
 
(a) Contribute to improved budget credibility at FGS, SL, PSS, JSS, and other FMS selected in accordance 
set forth in the Project Operations Manual (POM) by improving capacity and processes to strengthen 
budget preparation and analysis, which is also climate and gender informed. It will also support the 
establishment or enhancement of a Medium-Term Fiscal Framework that is underpinned by climate 
adaptation and climate risk mitigation considerations, linkages to reliable revenue forecasting, and 
other key budget preparation processes. A focus of budget analysis will be on the execution of 
humanitarian aid, which is scaling up significantly.  
(b) Enhance budget transparency and public participation, which is key to increase confidence in all levels 
of government. As a complement to ongoing efforts to strengthen budget transparency at the FGS 
level, this subcomponent will focus on FMSs and SL to build capacity and processes to (i) prepare and 
publish budget documentation (including developing citizen versions of key documents and 
conducting related outreach, and generating feedback through social media, radio, tv shows), (ii) 
engage with citizens (for example, through hearings targeting civil society organizations, the private 
sector, vulnerable populations, etc.), and (iii) improve parliamentary oversight of the budget.  
Subcomponent 1.5: Strengthen climate-informed public investment management (US$2.50 million: FGS & PSS 
US$2.50 million) 
 
56. 
This subcomponent will lay the foundations for the institutional and regulatory processes for capital 
projects funded through domestic resources, external borrowing, public-private partnerships (PPPs), and 
concessions. It will support the FGS and PSS in improving the legal and procedural framework for project screening 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 90  
     
 
and appraisal by carrying out an assessment and drafting appropriate amendments or proposed legislation. This 
will include developing climate screening guidelines and on-the-job support to the concessions’ technical units to 
assess project feasibility and prepare specifications for concession tenders and relatively large procurement.     
 
Component 2: Domestic Revenue Mobilization (US$26.00 million: FGS & FMSs US$19.50 million; SL US$6.50 
million) 
 
57. 
The objective of this component is to support the DRM priorities of FGS37, FMSs, and SL to strengthen 
their inland revenue systems and capacity and contribute to harmonizing tax administration in FGS and FMSs. 
In summary, the operation will support selected tax policy, tax administration, and taxpayer education and 
facilitation reforms, with gender and citizen engagement as a cross-cutting reform measure. The project will also 
support selected customs reforms in Somalia and SL, in active collaboration with the DPs, and build on the FCDO 
and EU-funded CRATES and PREMIS projects in Somalia and the FCDO PROFR project in SL. The component 
contributes to Pillars 3 and 4 of the GCRF by improving institutions and fiscal space to enable FGS, FMS and SL to 
successfully engage in crisis recovery activities and build long term resilience crisis resilience.  
 
Subcomponent 2.1: Improve tax policy capacity (US$1.50 million: FGS & FMSs US$1.25 million; SL US$0.25 
million) 
 
58. 
This subcomponent aims to strengthen tax policy capacity in FGS, FMSs, and SL and contribute to 
harmonizing tax policy in FGS and FMSs. For FGS and FMSs, the activities include: (a) deepening of tax policy 
reforms in FGS and PSS, by strengthening the already functioning tax policy units (TPUs) that have been 
established through the DRM & PFM Project; (b) research and analysis capacity building for evidence-based tax 
policy in JSS, GSS, SWSS, and HSS; (c) review of harmonized legal or regulatory frameworks for access to taxpayer 
and other data;38 (d) preparation of quarterly and annual revenue performance reports by FGS and FMSs, which 
are annually consolidated by the FGS and disclosed online; (e) review of FMSs tax laws; (f) FGS and FMSs dialogue 
and consensus-building on alignment and harmonization of tax policy; (g) implementation of the Medium-Term 
Revenue Strategy (MTRS) and Transition Plan (2022-2026) that the FGS, PSS, and JSS are preparing; and (h) 
recording of tax expenditures to prepare annual reports for submission to their respective legislatures along with 
annual budget documents. The customs-related support will build on the reforms supported by the CRATES 
Project. This subcomponent will also integrate climate adaptation and climate risk mitigation activities, such as 
the assessment and disclosure of tax expenditures with adverse environmental impacts.  
 
59. 
For SL, this subcomponent includes: (a) strengthening the TPU, which is at a preliminary stage of 
development; (b) supporting the TPU to conduct a problem-driven analysis and reform of tax instruments; (c) 
drafting regulations or guidance notes for the new laws; (d) preparing quarterly and annual revenue performance 
reports and disclosing them online; (e) recording tax expenditures to prepare annual reports for submission to the 
legislature along with the annual budget documents; and (f) supporting and implementing the Somaliland National 
Tax Policy (2021-2025) .39 These activities will include the preparation of achievable revenue-raising strategies and 
 
37 The FGS project support may include support to the Benadir Region. 
38 The WBG SCALED-UP project aims to support the creation of a comprehensive environment: a policy and legislative framework and the 
establishment of a competent and well governed digital ID authority. The Somali authorities have drafted a digital ID policy framework 
which includes key features of technical and data protection approaches. SERP activities can benefit from the ongoing SCALED-UP project 
support to inform the related DRM activities. 
39 Republic of Somaliland, Somaliland National Tax Policy (2021-2025), Ministry of Finance (October 2020), Macro-economic and Statistics 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 90  
     
 
targets in support of the medium-term budget framework. 
 
Subcomponent 2.2: Improve and harmonize inland revenue and selected customs administration systems and 
capacity (US$24.50 million: FGS & FMSs US$18.25 million; SL US$6.25 million) 
 
60. 
This subcomponent will strengthen tax administration systems and capacity in the FGS, FMSs, and SL 
and contribute to harmonizing tax administration in FGS and FMSs. To this end, this subcomponent will finance 
activities for: 
  
(a)  Modernization and Automation. Activities for FGS, FMSs, and SL include (i) development and 
implementation of a ‘fit for purpose’ ITAS in SL, FGS, PSS, and JSS by building on the support provided by 
the DRM & PFM Project and the PROFR project in SL. The ITAS will be interfaced with the FMIS of the 
respective state, such as the Somalia Financial Management Information System (SFMIS), FMSs BISAN 
system40 or the Somaliland Financial Management Information System (SL-FMIS); (ii) procurement of 
necessary ICT equipment and infrastructure; and (iii) development and implementation of ICT strategies 
and training to facilitate the adoption of the ITAS by both staff and taxpayers. In addition, existing business 
processes will be reviewed, and a needs assessment will be carried out to develop and implement more 
efficient and harmonized systems and processes in GSS, SWSS, and HSS. 
 
(b) Capacity Building and Scholarships. Activities, which will include extensive training, are as follows: 
 
(i) For FGS and FMSs, this subcomponent will finance capacity building activities, including: (a) 
implementation of a high integrity harmonized taxpayer identification number (TIN) structure; (b) 
designing and carrying out registration campaigns; (c) implementation and harmonization of a 
taxpayer segmentation strategy in JSS, GSS, SWSS, and HSS; (d) review of the Large Taxpayer Office 
(LTO) reforms in the FGS and PSS; (e) implementation of the medium-term training plans, which have 
been developed by the FGS and PSS (these training plans will also feed into the development and 
implementation of training plans by JSS, GSS, SWSS, and HSS;41 (f) expansion of the DRM Training 
Course piloted in PSS to the FGS and FMSs; (g) design of scholarships for targeted undergraduate and 
master’s level education; (h) technical assistance for the Somalia Revenue Academy in Mogadishu to 
set up local units in the FMSs and harmonize countrywide training; and (i) development of a 
consensus-based DRM HRM strategy for the FGS and FMSs, along with an optimal organizational 
structure and staffing.  
 
(ii) For SL, this subcomponent will finance capacity building activities including: (a) a training needs 
assessment; (b) development and implementation of a medium-term training plan; (c) initiation of a 
scholarship program; (d) a requirement for DRM officials to complete the DRM Training Course; (e) a 
plan for instituting a Revenue Academy; (f) strengthening of the LTO, including its re-tooling, people 
capacity, and organizational structure, building on the support provided by the PROFR Project, which  
closed in March 2022; and (g) planning for the  Somaliland Revenue Authority. 
 
 
Department.  
40 The FMIS purchased from Bisan Systems Ltd and used for FMSs is called is called BISAN. 
41 Informed by the Somalia Tax Administration Organizational Structures and Staffing Review (2021) supported by SCSP funded by Norad 
through the Global Tax Program. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 90  
     
 
(iii)  For FGS, FMSs, and SL, this subcomponent will finance scholarships. A Civil Servants Scholarship 
Program for targeted undergraduate and master’s level education, will be designed and financed 
under the project. Gender based criteria will be used in the selection process and more details will be 
provided in the project operations manual.  
 
(c) Taxpayer Education and Facilitation. Activities will focus on communication and training. 
   
(i) For FGS and FMSs, this subcomponent will finance: (a) development and implementation of a 
taxpayer42 orientation and communication program, including expansion of the DRM Training Course 
to a broader audience; (b) proactive disclosure of revenue performance and forecasting reports; (c) 
holding of tax forums; (d) taxpayer perception surveys; and (e) development of FGS and FMSs 
consensus-based communication strategies for taxpayer engagement, including compliance-related 
knowledge and skills, and development of the related training curriculum as well as taxpayers’ access 
to information about turning revenue into public services. 
 
(ii) For SL, this subcomponent will finance: (a) the same activities as at (a), (b), and (c) above; (b) 
development of communication strategies for taxpayer engagement as well as taxpayers’ access to 
information about turning revenue into public services; (c) monitoring of compliance with the 
taxpayer service charter; (d) taxpayer perception surveys; and (e) monitoring of facilitation and 
grievance redressal help desk services. 
 
Component 3: Public Sector Management (US$14.50 million: FGS & FMSs US$12.50 million; SL US$2 million) 
 
61. 
The objective of this component is to support the enhancement of systems, staff skills, and 
effectiveness of civil service management to improve government capacity to deliver services to citizens. The 
component contributes to Pillar 443 of the GCRF, supporting central institutional strengthening and capacity 
building. It closely aligns with the NPASRF for the FGS and FMSs, builds on the foundational reforms, and 
complements ongoing reforms. Areas of alignment between the project and NPASRF that aim to address the 
sectoral challenges include the: (a) operationalization and integration of HRMIS; (b) implementation of civil service 
laws, regulations, and policies, including those related to P&G and pensions, and reviewing these laws for any 
gaps; (c) improvement of strategic staffing; and (d) development of a civil servant pipeline as well as training and 
professional development for existing staff. In SL, CSSP II will address many of these challenges, and SERP will 
complement those efforts by focusing on the expansion of key government administrative services to local 
governments in Somaliland. Prioritization will be based on the needs of each State and informed by the status of 
current reforms as well as lessons learned and progress made under the CIP (which supports the FGS and PSS), 
the FCDO and EU-funded PREMIS Project, the Somaliland CSSP I and II, and other DP-funded programs.  
 
Subcomponent 3.1: Strengthening the capacity of central and line MDAs (US$7 million: FGS & FMSs US$5.20 
million; SL US$1.80 million) 
 
62. 
This subcomponent aims to strengthen central MDAs in FGS and FMSs and central and line MDAs in SL 
to enable them to deliver on their mandates. This will be achieved through the following:  
 
 
42 Informed by the Somalia Customs Compliance Study (2021) supported by SCSP ASA funded by Norad through the Global Tax Program. 
43 Strengthening Policies, Institutions and Investments for Rebuilding Better. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 90  
     
 
(a) Strategic staffing and capacity development of central MDAs. The subcomponent will determine the 
minimum and critical staffing needs of the MDAs, including for PFM, procurement, DRM, HRM, policy, 
M&E, and IT, while taking into account the wage bill and fiscal sustainability implications of staffing 
decisions. Staffing levels and the skills mix in MDAs will be reviewed in relation to the potential for the 
redeployment of staff and filling of critical positions. The recruitment and redeployment processes will be 
meritocratic and will be done through tiered screening and based on existing State procedures, and 
salaries shall be informed by their respective P&G structure. Recruitment and redeployment will also be 
used to promote female representation44 in the civil service as meritocratic processes mitigate the impact 
of cultural, clan, and political barriers that typically hinder female applicants. As regards capacity 
development, the capacity of the governments of all jurisdictions will be assessed and strengthened to 
enable them to develop, review and analyze, monitor, and coordinate policies. This will entail (i) 
strengthening the capacity of the SL Ministry of Planning to monitor government projects through an M&E 
system, and (ii) designing and developing a Cabinet Management Information System for FGS and SL. 
Implementation of capacity development plans and other priorities will be underpinned by assessments 
and strengthened institutional mandates and legal and policy frameworks. Coverage will include the Civil 
Service Commissions, Ministries of Labour, Ministries of Planning, and Offices of the President. The 
procurement of IT equipment, furniture, and vehicles for the new FMSs, central MDAs in the FMSs, and 
the construction of buildings to host offices and IT labs for their Civil Service Commissions will also be part 
of this subcomponent.   
 
(b) Improving delivery of selected priority government online administrative services by line MDAs.45 The 
subcomponent aims to improve access to such services in at least three of SL’s regions – through citizen 
access points, while also enhancing timeliness and accountability. The pilot access points will be created 
using existing infrastructure and office space to provide universal access to selected Government to 
Business (G2B) and Government to Citizen (G2C) services.46  These centers will provide a bridge from 
offline to online service delivery, and enable access to services to those without connectivity, devices, 
digital literacy, or who prefer face-to-face interaction. Support will focus on designing and piloting an 
operational model of decentralized service delivery. Support will include: a feasibility study and technical 
assistance on an operational and costing model, service passports to provide information on available 
services, delivery charters and service standards for accountability, and citizen feedback mechanisms on 
the quality of services, which will then be used to improve service provision, with a specific focus on the 
experience of female users. M&E systems will be developed to track and report on local governments’ 
performance, service access, and service quality. Additional activities may include communication and 
outreach to inform the public of the new service centers and the available services to support uptake and 
use. 
 
(c) Improving the quality of civil servants. Developing a cadre of high-quality staff in government is critical 
for the states to deliver on their programs. This subcomponent will therefore identify the recipients of 
training, provide continuous training through blended delivery models, establish a framework for 
investing in a pipeline of civil servants, and strengthen peer-to-peer learning approaches. It will support:  
 
(i) Strengthening of core training by conducting a training needs assessment that will inform 
 
44 Targets for ensuring women are given equal opportunities to serve in the civil service will also be set and monitored. 
45 These will be outlined in the project operations manual. 
46 For example, licenses, registration of properties, issuance of certificates, etc. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 90  
     
 
development of an HR and capacity development/training strategy, which will cover: (a) routine 
training modules along with medium- and long-term approaches, and (b) existing government 
schools (SOMPA-FGS47 and IPAM-PSS48), expansion of their programs to FMSs, and use of 
computer lab facilities to allow for continuous eLearning and web-based training. To help 
address the skills gap between men and women, trainings and related opportunities arranged 
through the project will ensure a gender balance by ensuring that, at the point of enrollment, 
women and men are given equal opportunity.49 To support equal access for men and women, 
training will be conducted during office hours and in the office whenever possible.  
 
(ii) Building/investing in a pipeline of future civil servants in selected functions. This will involve 
the development of an internship program for the FGS and FMSs.   
 
(d) Strengthening coordination across FGS and FMSs. This will be undertaken through the establishment and 
operationalization of public service reform committees50 within each FMS, supporting the establishment 
and operationalization of an intergovernmental public service reform committee51 that integrates the FGS 
and FMS intergovernmental public service reform committees, and enhancing coordination of civil service 
commission activities across FGS and FMSs by supporting consultations of the intergovernmental forum 
for civil service commissions.52 
 
Subcomponent 3.2: Implement Civil Service Management Systems and Policies, Pay and Grading, and Pension 
(US$7.50 million: FGS & FMSs US$7.30 million; SL US$0.20 million)  
63. 
This subcomponent will support the implementation of the following systems and policies, the 
foundations of which have been supported under the Somalia CIP, the SL CSSP I and II, and the FCDO- and EU- 
funded PREMIS PFM project. 
 
(a) HRMIS. The procurement and implementation of the HRMIS for FGS and PSS will be supported under this 
subcomponent.  The HRMIS53 in GSS, HSS, JSS, and SWSS will be upgraded, building on the progress already 
made. The project will support a rapid assessment of the existing HRMIS and related action plan to identify 
areas that need improvement.  Across the FGS and FMSs, the HRMIS will be interfaced with the pension 
systems.54 Support will be provided for SL, drawing from ongoing support under SL CSSP II for continuous 
payroll cleaning. HRMIS users in all jurisdictions will receive continuous training. The capacity of these 
systems will be enhanced to support automatic enforcement of HRM procedural requirements, capture 
evidence on how well HRM practices are complying with legal and regulatory requirements, as well as 
how they are furthering core HRM objectives. 
 
(b) HRM Policies and Regulations. The subcomponent will support: (i) assessment of the performance and 
 
47 School of Management and Public Administration. 
48 Institute of Public Administration and Management. 
49 50 percent of seats will be reserved for women, and once there is no more interest, the seats will be open to anyone. 
50 comprising all agencies implementing the public sector management component of the project. 
51 comprising all agencies implementing the public sector management component of the project in FGS and each FMS. 
52 comprising all civil service commissions of FGS and the FMSs. 
53 Including modules for employee records, leave and attendance management, biometric attendance, recruitment, payroll, performance 
appraisal, report generation. 
54The HRMIS used by the four south-central FMS is called BISAN.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 90  
     
 
application of existing civil service management policies, regulations, procedures, and guidelines in all 
jurisdictions in the Somali peninsula; (ii) implementation of the improvements identified; and (iii) 
harmonization of civil service management procedures across FGS and FMSs.  
 
(c) Pay and Grading. The subcomponent will also support the implementation of P&G systems already being 
established in the FGS and PSS through the Somalia CIP, while ensuring that P&G reforms are fiscally 
sustainable across all jurisdictions and provide civil servants with a clear career path with the promise of 
career and income growth. The new P&G system in the FGS and PSS is expected to correct cases of 
misclassified staff, i.e., staff assigned grades that are inconsistent with the responsibilities of their job. The 
project will also design a similar P&G methodology for the FGS and FMSs and develop a P&G policy to 
guide future reviews in the FMS. The project will support the governments in conducting P&G-related 
awareness-raising and communication activities, and completing a comparative salary survey that will 
require public/private comparative salary surveys in each FMSs, so that positions in the private and public 
sectors can be matched.  
 
(d) Pension. This subcomponent will support the development and operationalization of government pension 
systems.  
 
(i) The development of a policy and legal framework for pensions in GSS, HSS, JSS, and SWSS. This 
will include: (a) an initial actuarial analysis to inform the Pension Policy; and (b) TA to develop the 
Pension Policy and associated legislation. The subcomponent will also support the development of 
governance and administrative framework options, including the design and budget requirements for 
pensions in these FMSs. The project will allow flexibility to support implementation of the Pension 
Policy of FMSs. 
 
(ii) The FGS and PSS will be supported in the operationalization of their pension systems. Their 
operationalization is outlined in the Pension Policy and Laws, which were developed under the 
Somalia CIP. The World Bank has supported FGS and PSS in developing pension policies and 
developing/amending pension legislation. These are structured around the “pay as you go” pension 
system, which is the least expensive and best suited for Somalia. The project will entail establishing 
the institutional and governance structures required to implement the pension systems; 
implementing communications strategies; setting up payment systems; designing and procuring the 
pension MIS (business processes and system software); linking these to other systems such as the 
HRMIS, FMIS, and National ID systems; and training implementers and system users. The civil service 
laws will also be revised to reflect the provisions of the new pension laws. The release of civil servants 
who have attained retirement age will create fiscal space in the wage bill and enable fresh talent to 
join the civil service at entry pay levels.  
 
Component 4: Integrated Governance Support (US$4 million: FGS & FMSs US$3.08 million SL US$0.92 million) 
 
64. 
A joint approach across the different aspects of public resource management is necessary to achieve 
the objectives of improved information sharing, harmonized reporting, and more sustainable reforms. This 
component outlines the way in which PFM, DRM and PSM come together to support financial governance reforms 
and change management to guide the process. The component contributes to Pillar 455 of the GCRF, supporting 
 
55 Strengthening Policies, Institutions and Investments for Rebuilding Better. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 90  
     
 
institutional strengthening and capacity building.   
 
Subcomponent 4.1: Interconnectivity of public finance and HR systems (US$1.40 million: FGS & FMSs US$1.20 
million; SL US$0.20 million) 
  
65. 
This subcomponent will support improvements in the vertical interconnectivity and interoperability of 
existing and new systems in FGS and FMSs, and the horizontal interoperability between the FMIS, DRM, HRMIS, 
and pensions system in FGS, FMSs, and SL. It will establish platforms to securely exchange solutions; and build 
related capacity to ensure the sustainability of the interoperability framework and the interconnectivity of 
systems. 
   
Subcomponent 4.2: Human resource management in PFM and DRM (US$1.90 million: FGS & FMSs US$1.48 
million; SL US$0.42 million)  
 
66. 
This subcomponent will provide the broader structural reforms necessary to support the 
professionalization of PFM and DRM included in Components 1 and 2, for FGS, FMSs, and SL. It will entail support 
for (a) structured capacity building that is underpinned by functional reviews to establish suitable positions and 
organizational structures in PFM and DRM, (b) the development of competency frameworks that harmonize 
across the FGS and FMSs, and (c) a skills gap analysis performed against the required competences. The 
subcomponent will also support job evaluations and development of job descriptions for PFM and DRM staff. This 
will help set uniform structures of pay levels for PFM and DRM staff. Female participation in capacity building will 
be a critical area and will be monitored closely. Moreover, for sustainability, in-country training institutions will 
be strengthened.  
 
Subcomponent 4.3: Change management to support DRM and PFM systems and civil service reform (US$0.70 
million; FGS & FMSs US$0.40 million; SL US$0.30 million)    
 
67. 
This subcomponent will facilitate the transitions being supported in the project. It entails the 
development and implementation of a change management strategy to establish a shared vision and priorities 
among key stakeholders, garner their ownership for reform, and help leaders/managers in key MDAs to recognize 
and effectively and timely respond to implementation challenges. The strategy will identify the reforms to be 
addressed and include an assessment of existing power dynamics, the readiness for change, and the commitment 
of leadership. It will also identify vested interests, reasons for their reluctance to change, and mitigation measures. 
Finally, to address the issues identified, a communications strategy and related action plan will be developed and 
implemented. To complement this work, advisory support will be provided to selected leaders in impacted MDAs 
to help them implement the reforms. 
 
Component 5: Project Management, Coordination, and Support in Delivery (US$8 million: FGS & FMSs US$6 
million; SL US$2 million) 
 
68. 
This component will support the management, coordination, and M&E of project activities. It will also 
support innovative approaches for mobilizing teams to help with the implementation and delivery of project 
activities under Components 1 to 3. The component contributes to Pillar 456 of the GCRF, supporting institutional 
strengthening and capacity building. The component will fund the following subcomponents:  
 
56 Strengthening Policies, Institutions and Investments for Rebuilding Better. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 90  
     
 
 
Subcomponent 5.1. Project management (US$7 million: FGS & FMSs US$5.30 million; SL US$1.70 million)   
 
69. 
This subcomponent will support project coordination at FGS, FMSs, and SL. It will provide (a) overall 
coordination for the project; and (b) support services to implementing agencies in procurement, financial 
management, etc. Project management staff salaries, allowances, training, and basic facilities for managing the 
project will be funded under the project.  
 
Subcomponent 5.2. Results Monitoring and Impact Evaluation (US$1 million: FGS & FMSs US$0.70 million; SL 
US$0.30 million)  
 
70. 
This subcomponent will support results monitoring in FGS, FMSs, and SL through (a) capacity 
development for regular M&E at different implementation levels of the project, including writing and 
disseminating reports on implementation progress; (b) an  M&E consultant for verification of results, qualitative 
assessment of progress, and improvement of government capacity on M&E; and (c) a rigorous independent impact 
evaluation of capacity improvement interventions at both the institutional and employee levels, to determine 
changes to work performance and improvement of capacities/skills outcomes.  
 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
 
71. 
The improved management of public and human resources derived from the project will have a positive 
impact on the overall population of Somalia. While the primary beneficiaries will be the government, civil 
servants, and system users of the implementing MDAs in FGS, FMSs, and SL, the citizens will also benefit from the 
project. The government and system users in the MDAs will benefit from the harmonization and improvement of 
PFM, DRM, HRM systems and structures across FGS, FMSs, and SL for better management of public resources and 
administration. The capacity strengthening of employees of selected MDAs will minimize over-reliance on outside 
experts as sources of knowledge and thus reduce costs. In the long term, the strengthened confidence, skills, 
knowledge, and resources from capacity building will foster a sense of ownership and empowerment to civil 
servants for greater control over their own future development and growth. In addition to the main beneficiaries, 
the citizens will benefit from more accessible government administrative services, greater government 
responsiveness facilitated through the citizen engagement interventions and empowerment, and, on a broader 
scale, improved public administration in the respective jurisdictions. As a result of the intended improvements in 
planning, budgeting, and cash flow in the health and education sectors, citizens will enjoy better delivery of health 
and education services. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 90  
     
 
 
D. Results Chain 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 90  
     
 
 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
 
72. 
Due to its singular experience in working on a comprehensive approach to governance reforms across 
FGS, FMSs, and SL, the World Bank is well positioned to help build a cycle of enhanced state capability. First, 
the World Bank has supported reforms in PFM, DRM, and PSM across the FGS, FMSs, and SL. In 2022, these 
projects will end along with the FCDO and EU funded PREMIS project, though PREMIS will be renewed in a more 
limited form. Thus, without the World Bank’s continued engagement through SERP, a gap would arise, and an 
opportunity would be lost to consolidate and build on the reforms put in place through those interventions. 
Second, SERP addresses synergies and interlinkages between PFM, DRM, and PSM, areas in which the World Bank 
has extensive international experience. Lastly, by covering the whole of Somalia, SERP will be able to support the 
government on a harmonized agenda, which is much needed for fiscal transparency as fiscal decentralization 
becomes established.  
 
73. 
SERP will work in conjunction with other partners on specific activities. Under Component 1, SERP will 
work in close collaboration with the project that succeeds PREMIS in 2022, and Component 2 will work closely 
with the FCDO follow-on projects to CRATES in Somalia and PROFR in SL, which has taken the lead on customs 
reforms. Such support will respond to investment gap-filling, if any, and provide technical advisory support for 
DRM intergovernmental coordination and harmonization, building further on the collaboration developed by the 
DRM & PFM project and the SCSP ASA. More broadly, SERP complements the IMF’s Extended Credit Facility and 
Extended Fund Facility for Somalia. The program aims to mobilize domestic revenue and deepen and broaden 
ongoing PFM reforms. 
 
74. 
The Somalia Multi Partner Fund (SMPF 2)57 will play a key role in this project in numerous fronts.  SMPF 
will provide recipient executed funding worth US$ 15 million to supplement the IDA grant and support all activities 
across the project. Additionally, the SMPF will provide implementation support funding to enable close 
engagement of the World Bank task team with the implementing agencies of the project. Moreover, the World 
Bank executed fiduciary strengthening activities across the World Bank portfolio, supported by the SMPF, will 
directly strengthen the fiduciary quality of this project.  
 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
75. 
The Troika58 of World Bank governance-focused projects has demonstrated the value of an integrated 
approach to strengthening core government institutions. It has provided a platform to address the multi-faceted 
governance challenges in Somalia in a holistic manner. It has allowed for an integrated and interdependent set of 
governance solutions and incentives to be implemented successfully to strengthen the governments’ core 
institutions. The Troika has also highlighted the importance of adopting approaches that are: (i) innovative; (ii) 
flexible; (iii) balanced with regard to short-, medium- and long-term priorities; and (iv) cost-effective especially 
when engaging with multiple implementing agencies. While each of the three separate projects achieved their 
immediate aims, the need to establish a coordinated and consistent approach to reforms became increasingly 
 
57 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/somalia/brief/the-somalia-multi-partner-fund-mpf 
58 The Troika of governance-focused projects includes: (i) the Capacity Injection Project (CIP) (P149971) with the objective of strengthening 
the staffing and institutional capacity of selected line ministries and central agencies; (ii) the Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project 
(P154875), aimed at providing a credible and sustainable payroll and establishing the foundation for efficient budget execution and 
payment systems for the non-security sectors; and (iii) the DRM & PFM Capacity Strengthening Project (P151492), which focuses on 
improving the institutional capacity of central finance agencies. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project (P177298) 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 90  
     
 
clear during implementation, as also confirmed by the Multi Partner Fund midterm review. It is important to 
acknowledge that PFM, DRM, and PSM are closely interrelated and consequently dependent on each other for 
success, as shown in figure 5.  
 
Figure 5: Interlinkages and related benefits from bringing together PFM, DRM, and PSM 
 
 
76. 
The Somalia 