 
 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD4925  
 
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT 
 
ON A 
 
PROPOSED GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 54.7 MILLION  
(US$70 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA  
 
FOR THE 
 
‘BARWAAQO’ SOMALIA WATER FOR RURAL RESILIENCE PROJECT 
 
November 16, 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Water Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
 
 
   
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Somalia Water for Rural Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
   
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
 
(Exchange Rate Effective on September 30, 2022) 
Currency Unit =  Somali Shilling (SOS) 
US$1.00 =  SOS 568.50  
US$1 =  SDR 0.78 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 – December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Victoria Kwakwa 
Country Director: Keith E. Hansen 
Regional Director:  Ayat Soliman 
Practice Manager: Catherine Signe Tovey 
Task Team Leaders: Chantal Richey, Jeehye Kim 
  
  
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Somalia Water for Rural Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
   
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
  
CDD 
Community-Driven Development 
CIG 
Common Interest Group 
CIP 
Community Investment Plan 
COVID-19 
Coronavirus Disease 2019 
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework 
CSA 
Climate-Smart Agriculture 
E&S 
Environmental and Social 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
ESF 
Environmental and Social Framework 
ESIA 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
ESMP 
Environmental and Social Management Plan 
FFS 
Farmers’ Field School 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMS 
Federal Member State 
FRS 
Federal Republic of Somalia 
FSRP 
Food Systems Resilience Project 
FY 
Financial Year 
GBV 
Gender-Based Violence  
GHG 
Greenhouse Gas 
GM 
Grievance Mechanism 
GW4R 
Horn of Africa—Groundwater for Resilience Project 
Ha  
Hectare  
IPC 
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification 
LDN 
Land Degradation Neutrality 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MDA 
Ministries, Departments, and Agencies 
MIS 
Management Information System 
NDP 
National Development Plan 
NPCU 
National Project Coordination Unit 
NWRS 
National Water Resources Strategy 
O&M 
Operation and Maintenance 
PFM 
Public Financial Management 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
POM 
Project Operations Manual 
PP 
Procurement Plan 
SEA/SH 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, and Sexual Harassment 
SEP 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Somalia Water for Rural Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
   
 
 
SLM 
Sustainable Land Management 
SOC 
Soil Organic Carbon 
SOE 
Statement of Expenditure 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement  
SSAHUTLC 
Sub-Saharan Africa Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
TIMP 
Technology, Innovation, and Management Practice 
TPM 
Third Party Monitoring 
TTL 
Task Team Leader 
UN 
United Nations 
VDC 
Village Development Committee 
VMG 
Vulnerable Member Group 
WA 
Withdrawal Application 
WALP 
Water for Agro-Pastoralist Livelihoods Pilot Project 
WET 
Wadi Evaluation Tool 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Somalia Water for Rural Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
   
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... 1 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 8 
A. Country Context ................................................................................................................................ 8 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................. 10 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ............................................................................................. 12 
II. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 14 
A. Project Development Objective...................................................................................................... 14 
B. Project Components ....................................................................................................................... 14 
C. Project Beneficiaries ....................................................................................................................... 25 
D. Results Chain .................................................................................................................................. 27 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners .................................................................... 30 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design .................................................................... 30 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................ 32 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 32 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements ......................................................................... 34 
C. Sustainability ................................................................................................................................... 35 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 35 
A. Technical, Economic, and Financial Analysis .................................................................................. 35 
B. Gender ............................................................................................................................................. 36 
C. Fiduciary .......................................................................................................................................... 38 
D. Legal Operational Policies .............................................................................................................. 41 
E. Environment and Social .................................................................................................................. 41 
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES ..................................................................................... 45 
VI. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 45 
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 48 
Annex 1: Implementation Arrangements and Project Support Plan ...................................... 60 
  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Somalia Water for Rural Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 62 
      
DATASHEET 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 
 BASIC INFO TABLE 
Country(ies) 
Project Name 
Somalia 
Barwaaqo - Somalia Water for Rural Resilience Project 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
P177627 
Investment Project 
Financing 
Substantial 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component  (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[  ] Conflict  
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Enhanced Implementation Support (HEIS) 
 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
09-Dec-2022 
29-Feb-2028 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
No 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To develop water, agriculture, and environmental services for rural communities in Somalia’s drylands. 
 
Components 
 
Component Name  
Cost (US$, millions) 
 
Development of Multiuse Water Sources  
  26.30 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 62 
Development of Agriculture and Livestock Services Around Water Points  
  15.50 
 
Development of Environmental Catchment Services in Project Areas  
  10.00 
 
Project Management, Community-Driven Development and Enhancing Livelihoods 
Planning  
  17.50 
 
 
Organizations 
 
Borrower:  
 Federal Republic of Somalia  
Implementing Agency: 
 Ministry of Planning Investment and Economic Development  
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
Total Project Cost 
70.00 
Total Financing 
70.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
70.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILS-NewFinEnh1 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
70.00 
          IDA Grant 
70.00 
 
  
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
SML Amount 
Guarantee 
Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
   0.00 
  70.00 
0.00 
   0.00 
  70.00 
National 
Performance-Based 
Allocations (PBA) 
   0.00 
  70.00 
0.00 
   0.00 
  70.00 
Total 
   0.00 
  70.00 
   0.00 
   0.00 
  70.00 
 
 
 
 
Expected Disbursements (in US$, Millions) 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 62 
WB Fiscal Year   
 
 
 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
2027 
2028 
2029 
Annual 
 
 
 
   0.75 
   6.00 
  14.20 
  14.50 
  11.00 
  22.30 
   1.25 
Cumulative 
 
 
 
   0.75 
   6.75 
  20.95 
  35.45 
  46.45 
  68.75 
  70.00 
  
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Water 
Agriculture and Food, Environment, Natural Resources & the 
Blue Economy 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
⚫ High 
2. Macroeconomic 
⚫ High 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ Moderate 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ Moderate 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
⚫ Moderate 
6. Fiduciary 
⚫ High 
7. Environment and Social 
⚫ Substantial 
8. Stakeholders 
⚫ Substantial 
9. Other 
⚫ High 
10. Overall 
⚫ Substantial 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 62 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?  
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
  
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
  
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
Legal Covenants 
  
 Sections and Description 
Schedule 2, Section I. A. 2. (a)(1). The Recipient shall not later than one (1) month after the Effective Date, 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 62 
establish, and thereafter maintain, throughout the implementation of the Project, a Project steering committee 
(“Federal Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee”) at the federal level with functions, composition and resources 
satisfactory to the Association. 
 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Schedule 2, Section I. A. 2. (b).  The Recipient shall cause the Ministry of Planning Investment and Economic 
Development to establish no later than ninety (90) days after the Signature Date and thereafter maintain a national 
project coordination unit (“National Project Coordination Unit” or “NPCU”), to be responsible for overseeing and 
monitoring the progress of the Project. The Ministry of Planning Investment and Economic Development shall be 
responsible for the overall supervision of Project activities within its jurisdiction, under the general guidance of the 
Federal Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Schedule 2, Section I. A. 2. (c).  The Recipient shall maintain, throughout the period of implementation of the 
Project, the EAFS Unit, established within MoF’s Office of Accountant General, with competent, experienced and 
qualified staff, in sufficient numbers and under terms of reference acceptable to the Association, and vested with 
such powers, financial resources, functions and competencies, acceptable to the Association and set forth in the 
Comprehensive Operations and Accounting Procedures (COAP) Manual, necessary to assist the NPCU with the day-
to-day financial management and fiduciary responsibilities under the Project, including carrying out the internal 
controls, and Internal audit, preparing the interim financial reports, preparing the Project’s Financial Statement and 
coordinating their external audit. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Schedule 2, Section III.3. No later than thirty (30) months after the Effective Date, the Recipient shall, in conjunction 
with the Association, carry out a mid-term review of the Project (the “Mid-term Review”), covering the progress 
achieved in the implementation of the Project. To this end, the Recipient shall prepare - under terms of reference 
satisfactory to the Association - and furnish to the Association not less than three (3) months prior to the beginning 
of the Mid-term Review, a report integrating the results of the Project’s monitoring and evaluation activities, on the 
progress achieved in the carrying out of the Project during the period preceding the date of such report, and setting 
out the measures recommended to ensure the efficient carrying out of the Project and the achievement of the 
objective of the Project during the period following such date. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Schedule 2, Section I. F.  No later than one-hundred and eighty (180) days after the Signature Date, the Recipient 
shall enter into a contract with a Third Party Implementing Entity to implement Project activities in the Agreed 
Areas. 
 
 
 
 Sections and Description 
Schedule 2, Section I.C.1(a). Prior to implementing any activities under their Respective Activities under the Project 
and prior to provision of any funds to any of the Federal Member States or Somaliland for the purpose of carrying 
out of their Respective Activities under the Project, the Recipient shall make part of the proceeds of the Financing 
available on grant terms, to each Federal Member State and Somaliland under such agreements (“Subsidiary 
Agreements”) between the Recipient and such Federal Member States and Somaliland respectively, under terms 
and conditions acceptable to the Association. 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 62 
 Sections and Description 
Schedule 2, Section I.C.2 (a). The Recipient shall prepare and furnish to the Association on an annual basis, by no 
later than October 31of each calendar year, commencing on October 31, 2023, the annual work plan and budget 
containing all activities proposed to be included in the Project during the following Fiscal Year, and a proposed 
financing plan (setting forth the proposed amounts and sources of financing) for expenditures required for such 
activities; Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Annual Work Plan and Budget for the first year of Project 
implementation shall be prepared by the Recipient by not later than one (1) month after the Effective Date. 
 
 
 
 
Conditions 
  
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
Article IV. Section 4.01 (a).The Recipient has prepared and adopted 
a Project Operations Manual, pursuant to Section I.B.2(b) of 
schedule 2 to this Agreement and, in a manner and substance 
satisfactory to the Association. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
Article IV. Section 4.01 (b). The Recipient has adopted the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework, Labor 
Management Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, and 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan, in accordance with the 
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan and, in a manner and 
substance satisfactory to the Association. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Disbursement 
IBRD/IDA 
Schedule 2, Section III.B.1(b). No withdrawal shall be made under 
category one: For payments made prior to the Signature Date; Until 
the Recipient has established the National Project Coordination 
Unit pursuant to Section I.A.1(b) of Schedule 2 to this Agreement;  
Until at least two Subsidiary Agreements have been signed between 
the Recipient and two Federal Member States; and Until the 
Recipient has established and operationalized the Project’s 
grievance redress mechanism, in a manner and substance 
satisfactory to the Association. 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Disbursement 
IBRD/IDA 
Schedule 2, Section III.B.1(c). No withdrawal shall be made under 
Category (2) until Somaliland has: Executed the Subsidiary 
Agreement for its Respective Activities under the Project; Prepared 
and formally adopted the Project Operations Manual for its 
Respective Activities under the Project; Established the institutional 
arrangements set forth in the Project Operations Manual for 
implementation of its Respective Activities under the Project; and 
Prepared all necessary environmental and social risks management 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 62 
instruments in accordance with the ESCP; all in a manner and 
substance satisfactory to the Association. 
 
 
    
  
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 62 
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
A. Country Context 
1. 
 Recovering from conflict, Somalia has been on a trajectory toward political stabilization and reconstruction. In 
2012, a Provisional Constitution was adopted, establishing the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS). Following this 
political transition and the establishment of the Federal Member States (FMSs) (Puntland, Galmudug, Hirshabelle, South 
West State and Jubbaland), the 2017 elections were peaceful and established the current administration. The sustained 
political, economic, and institutional reforms have enabled the rebuilding of core state functions, though the country’s 
fiscal position remains largely supported by official development assistance, remittances, and foreign direct investment. 
The country still faces persistent insecurity, conflict, and unresolved political tensions, as demonstrated by the delay of 
the elections from 2020 to 2022. A new President was officially inaugurated on June 9, 2022. 
2. 
 Poverty remains pervasive, with almost 70 percent of Somalis living on less than US$1.90 a day in purchasing 
power parity terms. Poverty rates are elevated among internally displaced people living in settlements, people living in 
rural communities, and nomads, with almost 90 percent of households deprived in at least one dimension of poverty and 
nearly 70 percent suffering in two or more.1 The poorest also have lower access to services, while women have lower 
rates of literacy and educational attainment (only 40 percent of women are literate compared with 50 percent of men).2 
About 7.8 million Somalis have been affected by the worst drought in four decades, with more than 1 million displaced 
by drought including nearly 99,000 in August 2022.3 In the absence of further humanitarian assistance, famine is 
projected in the Baidoa and Burhakaba districts, Bay region, during October-December 2022.4 The severe drought 
combined with the effects of war in Ukraine have led to inflationary pressures. Inflation is projected at 8.5 percent in 
2022 and year-on-year food inflation reached 16 percent in September 2022.5 Over 2.6 million Somalis have been 
displaced by the effects of war, floods, droughts, and loss of livelihoods.6 In 2022, there is a risk of famine, as multi season 
drought and soaring food prices affect food insecurity and malnutrition. The current rising costs of water and livestock 
feed, as well as migration to distant areas in search of pasture and water, have led to very high debt burdens among 
pastoral households. Agro-pastoral and riverine livelihood zones have recently had several consecutive failed cereal 
harvests. In the coming months, the production and supply chain impact of the war in Ukraine is expected to put further 
upward pressure on food prices, thereby threatening the food security of millions across Somalia. There are concerns 
about weakening coping capacity of the poor and vulnerable population. 
3. 
Somalia’s arid to semi-arid climate is vulnerable to natural hazards, particularly drought and floods, and is 
projected to be at even greater risk in the future due to climate change. Historically, shocks from droughts and flooding, 
coupled with land degradation have contributed to loss of agricultural production, poverty, displacement, biodiversity 
loss, and conflict. Somalia has one of the highest inter-annual variations of rainfall in Africa, which influences pastoral 
and agro-pastoral production systems. Between 2000 and 2015 Somalia lost 27 percent of its total land area to land 
 
1 World Bank. April 2019. “Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment: Findings from Wave 2 of the Somalia High Frequency Survey.” 
2 World Bank. April 2019. “Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment: Findings from Wave 2 of the Somalia High Frequency Survey.” 
3 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. August 2022. “Somalia Situation Report.” 
4 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. August 2022. “Somalia Situation Report.” 
5 World Bank. June 2022. “Somalia Economic Update.” And Federal Government of Somalia National Bureau of Statistics, October 2022. 
6 Norwegian Institute of International Affairs (NIPI) and Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI). 2021. Climate, Peace 
and Security Fact Sheet Somalia. Accessed March 1, 2022: 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/210203FINALFactSheetSomaliaSkisserLR11.pdf  
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 62 
degradation while deforestation is also prevalent.7 There is an increasing difficulty in predicting weather phenomena.8 
Somalia has experienced at least one drought every four years since the 1960s, and is, yet again, currently facing severe 
food insecurity, as shown in Figure 1 in the latest Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) projections map. 
Looking into the future, project beneficiaries will face increased risks of flood and drought, which will further undermine 
their coping mechanisms, leading to increased displacement and higher poverty rates. Pastoral livelihoods and 
agricultural production are likely to be negatively affected, with a detrimental impact on the national economy. Flood 
hazard risks, which are anticipated to increase in terms of intensity and frequency because of climate change, are 
particularly high in areas in the southwest, where a large proportion of the land is cropped. Other parts of the southwest, 
along with the middle and northwest are the most drought prone.9  
Figure 1. IPC Integrated Food Security Phase Classification10  
 
7 World Bank. 2022. “Somalia needs its trees to restore landscapes and livelihoods.” [Online]. Accessed November 7, 2022: 
https://blogs.worldbank.org/africacan/somalia-needs-its-trees-restore-landscapes-and-
livelihoods#:~:text=A%202020%20Somali%20government%20report,biological%20degradation%2C%20and%20gully%20erosion  
8 IBRD and FAO. 2018. Somalia Country Economic Memorandum: Rebuilding resilient and sustainable agriculture in Somalia. International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (pp. 42). 
9 Due to limitations of climate modelling, uncertainties with respect to the increases in frequency or intensity of events and impacts.  
10 The IPC Acute Food Insecurity (IPC AFI) classification, ipcinfo.org, provides strategically relevant information to decision makers that 
focuses on short-term objectives to prevent, mitigate or decrease severe food insecurity that threatens lives or livelihoods. In particular, 
the IPC Acute Food Insecurity classification differentiates between different levels of severity of acute food insecurity, classifying units of 
analysis in five distinct phases: (1) Minimal/None; (2) Stressed; (3) Crisis; (4) Emergency; and (5) Catastrophe/Famine. Each of these phases 
has important and distinct implications for where and how best to intervene. Map sourced from https://www.ipcinfo.org/ 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 62 
4. 
Somalia is in a record-breaking five-season drought, further worsened by rising global food prices. Multiple 
areas of Somalia face a risk of famine (IPC Phase 5) amid an exceptionally severe drought, soaring staple food prices, and 
heightened conflict and insecurity. The September to November Deyr rain11 has been performing very poorly, making it 
the fifth consecutive failed rainy season. Approximately 6.7 million people across Somalia are expected to face Crisis (IPC 
Phase 3) or worse acute food insecurity outcomes between October and December, including 2.2 million people that will 
likely be in Emergency (IPC Phase 4) and at least 300,560 people that will likely be in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5).12 Record-
high global food prices have also had an outsized impact on Somalia, which typically imports over half of its national food 
supply. Household purchasing power is at a decade low, particularly in Bakool, Gedo, Bay, and Middle Jubba.  
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
5. 
Natural resources such as agriculture, livestock, and fisheries are important for rural Somali livelihoods.13 
Somalia encompasses large areas suitable for livestock grazing, browsing, and fodder production. Fertile alluvial soils 
allow for staple cereals, oil seeds, legumes, and horticulture crops, while forests provide prized gums and resins, as well 
as charcoal for cooking. The agriculture and livestock sectors are dependent on water of sufficient quantity, quality, and 
affordability. Many rural Somalis earn their living from agriculture (notably animal husbandry and crop farming), but 
water scarcity has led to widespread crop devastation as well as livestock and human deaths. There are concerns that 
without preventive approaches to address the effects of climate change and extreme weather, existing vulnerabilities 
will be exacerbated, reducing livelihood options, which may negatively impact on stability and security.14 Agriculture, 
forestry, and other land uses contribute 96 percent of national greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in Somalia, of which 43 
percent result from loss of soil carbon in grasslands due to conversion to other uses.15 From a climate change mitigation 
perspective, increasing soil carbon stocks and halting the degradation exacerbated by droughts and floods are central. 
6. 
Lives are shaped by uncertain water supplies and water insecurity is growing. The Shabelle and the Jubba Rivers 
in the south are Somalia’s only two permanent rivers—all others are ephemeral. In nonriverine regions, in times of severe 
drought, boreholes are an important source of water, but water from deep aquifers is often unsuitable for drinking or 
irrigation (salty or hard) and extraction costs are high. The population relies mostly on small water reservoirs (berkads), 
open dams, shallow hand-dug wells, and springs, which depend on groundwater and fluctuating rainfall. For only a few 
months in the year, this water also supports a small but growing horticultural production. In recent decades, expansion 
of private enclosures on traditionally communal rangelands, especially along livestock migration routes, jeopardizes the 
mobility of pastoralist communities, thereby weakening their capacity to cope with adverse climate conditions. Existing 
tensions and conflict risks are amplified during extended dry periods.  
7. 
There are several prevalent gender gaps in Somalia which are deeply linked to water insecurity. The first is the 
time females spend on fetching water: in 2020, only a third of Somali households had water piped to their homes, with 
42 percent depending on communal water taps and 16 percent on groundwater point sources. 16 As a result, 41 percent 
 
11 There are, broadly, four seasons in Somalia: two rainy seasons—the Gu (main rainy season from mid-March to June) and Deyr (secondary 
rainy season from mid-September to November). The two dry seasons are Haagal (July to September) and Jilaal (December to March). 
12 FSNAU (Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit) of the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO)of the United Nations, Somalia Post 
Gu assessment results, September 2022. 
13 World Bank. 2018. “Somalia Systematic Diagnostic.” 
14 Norwegian Institute of International Affairs (NIPI) and Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI). 2021. Climate, Peace 
and Security Fact Sheet Somalia. Accessed March 1, 2022: 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/210203FINALFactSheetSomaliaSkisserLR11.pdf  
15 Office of the Prime Minister (OPM). 2018. Somalia’s First National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC), the Federal Republic of Somalia. Accessed January 13, 2022: 
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/THE%20INITIAL%20NATIONAL%20COMMUNICATION%20FOR%20SOMALIA.pdf  
16 Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). 2021. National Gender Profile of Agricultural and Rural Livelihoods; 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 62 
of Somalis do not have access to a regular and stable improved water source for drinking.17 As the main providers of 
water to the household, women and girls are particularly impacted, spending an average of three to six hours per day 
collecting water.18 This time is deducted from what could be spent on productive activities or education. The second gap 
is decision making and leadership: women rarely have a voice in water governance. At the national level, gender 
inequality is evident in women’s low participation in leadership/decision-making roles.19 The third gap is agricultural 
productivity and income generation: women play important roles in agriculture and livestock production, but productivity 
is limited by lack of access to markets, inputs, extension services support, and training, as well as time taken for domestic 
responsibilities. The employment gap is also affected by the water collection burden as well as low levels of education, 
and cultural views of women’s roles and abilities. Lastly, poverty, food insecurity, and environmental degradation have a 
disproportionate impact on rural women’s health, due to their inferior socioeconomic, legal, and political status and roles 
as producers and household managers. All these gender gaps result in higher levels of malnutrition and lower food 
security among women.  
8. 
Environmental challenges, exacerbated by climate change, affect the rural economy and impact the urban 
economy. With over a quarter of Somalia’s territory degraded, coupled with deforestation and loss of soil,20 rural 
livelihoods are under threat, a process that has occurred over decades. These environmental challenges, along with 
droughts, cause pastoralists to lose their livestock (main source of wealth and income), while farmers and agro-
pastoralists lose their harvest (which is their main source of food). Given that pastoralism and agriculture are important 
to the economy, land degradation leads to reductions in income and food security and affects rural livelihoods, with a 
direct knock-on effect on the urban economy. It is estimated that approximately 54 percent of Somalia’s population live 
in urban areas21 and a shift to urban hubs has increased pressure on existing water infrastructure. Scarce water resources 
must be shared between rural communities and growing urban centers. 
9. 
Soil and water conservation measures are vital to reversing land degradation, increase the resilience of the rural 
economy, and restore and conserve soil organic carbon (SOC). Opportunities exist to increase water storage across 
Somalia’s drylands22 by deploying low-cost, small-scale water harvesting and storage technologies. These, combined with 
soil improvement techniques, can reduce run-off and erosion, promote infiltration, reduce evaporation losses, and 
contribute towards restoring soil carbon sequestration capacity. Such measures can improve the adaptive capacity of 
drylands by helping sustain vegetation biomass during dry periods and drought,23 with some technologies able to supply 
water for domestic, livestock, and agricultural consumption. Increasing soil carbon stocks double up to enhance carbon 
sinks. 
10. 
Somalia’s relatively embryonic but steadily improving institutional capacity to manage water, agriculture, 
livestock, and environmental resources still requires strengthening. Institutional roles need ongoing clarification to 
 
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/NATIONAL%20GENDER%20PROFILE%20Somalia.pdf  
Also see: Croome and Husain. 2020. Climate crisis, gender inequalities and local response in Somalia/Somaliland.  
https://www.fmreview.org/sites/fmr/files/FMRdownloads/en/issue64/croome-hussein.pdf 
17 2021 Somalia Joint Multi-Cluster Needs Assessment. Accessed March 2022: reliefweb.org  
18 FAO (2021), pg. 19. 
19 Gender inequality is alarmingly high in Somalia at 0.776 out of a value of 1 (complete inequality), with Somalia at one of the lowest 
positions globally on the Gender Inequality Index. Women suffer severe exclusion and inequality in all dimensions of the index—health, 
employment, and labor market participation (UNDP 2015). 
20 World Bank. 2022. “Somalia needs its trees to restore landscapes and livelihoods.” [Online]. Accessed November 7, 2022: 
https://blogs.worldbank.org/africacan/somalia-needs-its-trees-restore-landscapes-and-
livelihoods#:~:text=A%202020%20Somali%20government%20report,biological%20degradation%2C%20and%20gully%20erosion 
21 World Bank. 2020. Somalia Urbanization Review. 
22 The term ‘drylands’ refers to areas characterized by large water deficits because potential evapotranspiration is much greater than 
precipitation. 
23 Ryan and Elsner. 2016. “The potential for sand dams to increase the adaptive capacity of East African drylands to climate change.”  
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 62 
better manage and successfully implement investment opportunities. United Nations’ (UN) managed sector cluster 
systems are gradually becoming country managed with government beginning to take responsibility for sectoral 
oversight. The Ministry of Energy and Water Resources recently published the National Water Resources Strategy which 
is helping to position the Ministry to the forefront of sector leadership. The Ministries of Agriculture, Livestock and 
Directorates, and the Ministries of Environment, are on a similar trajectory, albeit at slower paces. Social development is 
needed to fuel and sustain economic growth, through human capital development, social protection, and disaster risk 
management, with the government’s Ninth National Development Plan (NDP9) aiming to address the root causes of 
poverty. 
11. 
Somalia has shown that it is possible to rely on low-cost, low to zero-carbon energy, small-scale water 
harvesting, and storage technologies to enhance rural communities’ access to water in drylands. The Second Water for 
Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project, or ‘Barwaaqo’ project,24 builds on and scales up the activities of the 
Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (Biyoole, P167826) under implementation since January 2020 
and will continue to provide low-cost, low to zero-carbon energy, small-scale water harvesting and storage 
technologies.25 Both projects invest in water, agriculture, livestock, and environmental services and the institutions that 
manage them. In so doing, the projects address climate vulnerabilities, land degradation, deforestation depleted soil 
carbon stock, decreased land cover and soil erosion, as well as climate change mitigation using solar energy, rather than 
fossil fuels for water lifting. Somaliland and Puntland State tested the development of sand dams under the Water for 
Agro-Pastoralist Livelihoods Pilot Project (WALP, P152024). This pilot paved the way for the ongoing Biyoole project, 
which is scaling up the adoption of sand dams and other water-harvesting technologies across Puntland, Galmudug, and 
South West States.  
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
12. 
The project is aligned with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Federal Republic 
of Somalia (FY19–22) (Report No. 124734-SO) discussed by the Board on September 25, 2018.26 The project supports 
priorities in the two Focus Areas: (1) Strengthening institutions to deliver services; and (2) Restoring economic resilience 
and opportunities. Ongoing governance programs will be strengthened to improve the provision and quality of key social 
services and resilience in Focus Area 1 while economic resilience will be increased in Focus Area 2 to provide a base upon 
which durable poverty reduction and inclusive growth strategies can be made. The CPF is aligned with the development 
priorities set by the government’s NDP9, the Drought Impact Needs Assessment, Recovery and Resilience Framework 
and the other individual Sector Strategic Plans. The Performance and Learning Review of the Country Partnership 
Framework, concluded in September 2022, introduced a new Focus Area 3 focused on strengthening resilience to support 
Somalia’s resilient recovery and capacity to respond to shocks. Focus Area 3 includes an expanded objective on 
strengthening rural resilience and food security, which this project embodies. 
13. 
The World Bank brings Somalia a comparative advantage in supporting institution building and on-budget 
financing. At present, the World Bank portfolio represents approximately 28 percent of Somalia’s total official 
development assistance. Other donors are playing a major role in financing rural community-based resilience, generally 
through joint UN programs or those directly implemented by nongovernmental organizations or the private sector. The 
protracted humanitarian situation and limited use of country systems has led to a fragmented aid environment which, 
unless managed, will continue to undermine the capacity of national institutions and state-building initiatives. Relative 
to the other main actors, the World Bank’s comparative advantage in Somalia has been to strengthen institutions at the 
 
24 ‘Barwaaqo’ is the new Somali vernacular project name for the Biyoole 2 project. It means prosperity. 
25 Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project – Biyoole. P167826, US$42 million, approved July 1, 2019. 
26 The Performance Learning Review extended the County Partnership Framework through FY23. 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 62 
national and subnational levels, through supporting the establishment of clear norms and standards mostly by channeling 
funds through government systems. Until now, the World Bank has channeled more than US$745 million through these 
country systems (2019–2021).  
14. 
The proposed project contributes to higher-level objectives consistent with the World Bank’s twin goals of 
ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity. Improving access to water resources in a dryland 
environment can significantly improve human health and well-being and reduce the effects of poverty. The project seeks 
to reduce the risks and impacts of climate change–exacerbated floods and droughts through the introduction of 
technologies and practices that provide year-round water access, reduce the likelihood of localized flooding, and increase 
soil water content, thus enhancing the resilience of communities to extreme water-related weather events which, in 
turn, contribute to poverty reduction. The project will support income generation for vulnerable people and catalyze 
economic growth in rural areas. By promoting sustainable use of natural resources, the project will improve the 
availability of water for longer periods, thus reducing water-related displacement and attenuating the drivers of resource-
based conflicts. The project is aligned with the World Bank Group Climate Change Action Plan (CCAP 2021–2025) 
objectives by promoting a low-carbon and climate resilient development approach as well as the World Bank Group’s 
Green, Resilient, and Inclusive Development (GRID) approach, which addresses the risks to people, the planet, and the 
economy in an integrated manner and tailored to needs. 
15. 
The project is aligned with the World Bank Group Crisis Response Framework (GCRF). The project components 
will contribute to Pillar 1—Responding to Food Insecurity (supporting thematic areas ‘support production and producers’ 
and ‘facilitate increased trade’, and ‘scale up social protection to support the vulnerable’) by providing water and 
agricultural inputs for small scale farming and livestock production, which is used for household consumption and sale in 
local markets; Pillar 3—Strengthening Resilience to be better prepared for any future crisis and challenges (supporting 
thematic areas ‘nutrition sensitive and sustainable food systems’ and ‘climate resilience’) is addressed through the sand 
dams ability to harvest and store water through long dry periods, and the introduction of the environmental catchment 
service to promote soil conservation; and Pillar 4—Strengthening Policies, Institutions, and Investments for Rebuilding 
Better to utilize the opportunities the crises provide to improve long-term development outcomes (supporting thematic 
areas ‘resilient reconstruction’, green and sustainable growth, and ’institutional strengthening and capacity building’). 
Each component in the project has a sub-component (1.3, 2.3, 3.2 & 4.2) that includes specific technically focused 
institutional and capacity building activities that are designed to support the strengthening of country systems to be able 
to build climate resilient infrastructure.  
16. 
The project is aligned with the 2021 National Water Resources Strategy (NWRS), including the Somaliland Water 
Sector Strategic Plan (2022–2026). A first for Somalia, the NWRS describes the critical economic and social importance 
of water in Somali society. Access to water is identified as a key stepping-stone for socioeconomic development and an 
entry point to peace building. The project is also aligned with Somalia’s updated Nationally Determined Contribution 
(2021), which includes a GHG emissions reduction target of 30 percent versus business as usual by 2030, focused on the 
Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use sector. This includes activities such as promoting rainwater harvesting and 
conservation of water, agroforestry practices, rangeland restoration and rehabilitation. The United Nations Convention 
to Combat Desertification proposes the overarching target of achieving Land Degradation Neutrality by 2030. This project 
supports the realization of activities planned in these international climate commitments and thus facilitates the 
attainment of the goals set therein. The project is aligned with the Somaliland policy and strategy documents (Water 
Strategic Plan, National Agriculture Plan, Animal Health and Production Strategy, and Environment Strategic Plan). 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 62 
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 
A. Project Development Objective 
PDO Statement 
To develop water, agriculture, and environmental services for rural communities in Somalia’s drylands. 
PDO Level Indicators 
17. 
Achievement of the PDO will be measured by the following outcome-level indicators: 
• 
Number of people provided with access to improved water sources (of which proportion of females). 
• 
Farmers adopting improved agricultural technology (of which proportion of females). 
• 
Land area (hectare) under sustainable landscape management practices. 
18. 
The Barwaaqo project will build on the investments under the Biyoole project. The proposed project will increase 
activities in the existing project areas of Somaliland, Puntland, Galmudug, and South West States and will expand to two 
additional FMSs—Hirshabelle and Jubbaland—where it will focus on the areas situated away from the floodplains of the 
Shabelle and the Jubba rivers. The project will work in areas that are of low security risk and will adopt a flexible approach 
to selecting new sites should security concerns emerge. The project will provide water to 500,000 people—representing 
15 percent of the rural population who currently only have access to limited service, and unimproved or surface water.27  
19. 
While much of the core elements of the Barwaaqo project will build on the Biyoole project, such as investments 
in water points and livelihoods that depend on them, there will be some notable changes. The project will add 
environmental services as a new set of activities in the catchment areas around the water points. This includes climate 
change adaptation and mitigation measures. In addition, the project will support the strengthening of natural resources 
management—including water, land, forests, rangelands around the water points, to increase the sustainability of 
investments. As demonstrated in the infographic turning sand into water (Figure 4), the project aims to conserve, harvest, 
and store rainwater, helping to slowly ‘green’ drylands. Lastly, institutional strengthening, which was a standalone 
component under Biyoole, will be incorporated into each component. The rationale for this is described comprehensively 
in the ‘Lessons Learned’ section. Institutional strengthening will include measures to assess and increase the employment 
of women, particularly in technical and managerial roles, in the participating water and agriculture institutions.  
 
B. Project Components 
20. 
This project integrates water supply development, agriculture (farming and livestock) development, and 
environmental management with a focus on climate adaptation and climate mitigation. The project will continue to 
build the capacity of the government to provide water, agriculture, and environmental services to improve water access, 
strengthen sustainable livelihoods, and reduce vulnerabilities to extreme climate events, contributing to pillars 1, 3, and 
4 of the Global Crisis Response Framework (GCRF). The project comprises four interlinked components: (a) Development 
of Multiuse Water Sources; (b) Development of Agriculture and Livestock Services around Water Points; (c) Development 
of Environmental Catchment Services in Project Areas; and (d) Project Management, Community Development and 
Enhancing Livelihoods Planning. 
 
27 WHO UNICEF/JMP 2020: https://washdata.org/data/household#!/table?geo0=country&geo1=SOM 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 62 
Component 1: Development of Multiuse Water Sources (US$26.3 million IDA equivalent) 
21. 
This component will be implemented by the Ministries of Water in Somaliland and FMSs,28 and Puntland Water 
Development Agency. The component aims to improve water availability for domestic use, farming, and livestock, and 
to address the effects of climate change–exacerbated droughts and floods by developing water supply infrastructure that 
provides reliable supply, including small sand and subsurface dams in dry riverbeds (wadis) and surface water storage 
infrastructure (for example, berkads and hafir dams). Component 1 activities will contribute to Pillar 1 of GCRF- 
Responding to Food Insecurity - by supporting small-scale farm and livestock production and producers through improved 
water access. The construction and rehabilitation of water points, including sand dams, will contribute to Pillar 3 of GCRF- 
Strengthening Resilience- through promoting soil conservation and storage of water against long dry periods. In line with 
the project’s climate mitigation emphasis, all water lifting will be done via low- to zero-carbon energy units, that is, solar 
pumps, coupled with elevated storage and gravity-fed auxiliary structures such as cattle troughs, water points for human 
use, and irrigation. This will eliminate carbon emissions by avoiding the use of fossil-based energy sources. By 
incorporating climate resilience into the planning process as well as into the design, new infrastructure, rehabilitation 
and/or retrofitted facilities will be more reliable (reduced risk of system failure), and less likely to be affected by climate-
related shocks such as floods and droughts. This will in turn make the residents of the targeted areas more resilient to 
climate change–exacerbated water shortages and flooding. These investments will be the anchor assets around which 
other project activities in each selected sub-catchment will seek to capitalize and manage. The project will work in areas 
that are of low security risk and will adopt a flexible approach to selecting new sites should security concerns emerge. 
The project will complement the advisory services and analytical work undertaken through the Untapping Resilience: 
Groundwater Management and Learning in the Horn of Africa’s Borderlands project (P178786), which looks to enhance 
regional cooperation on groundwater management in the Horn of Africa (HoA) with a focus on sustainable groundwater 
service delivery.  
a. Subcomponent 1.1: Construction of new water points (US$17.8 million IDA equivalent) 
22. 
 This subcomponent will finance the development of new, climate-resilient water infrastructure. To mitigate 
evapotranspiration (which is a significant challenge for surface water storage in Somalia) appropriate technologies for 
harvesting water in wadis,29 such as sand and subsurface dams, will be the principal form of infrastructure used. In 
situations where wadi water harvesting is not technically possible, other options such as berkads30 or balleys31 will be 
acceptable. As a last resort, and only if no surface storage options are feasible, the subcomponent may support 
construction of boreholes for groundwater extraction, particularly in project areas where seasonality plays a bigger role. 
These climate-informed infrastructure investments will enhance the resilience of beneficiaries as extreme temperatures 
and frequent droughts will be witnessed due to climate change. Site selection, including completed construction 
investment reports,32 of the new 100 sites would be done in quarterly batches with 25 sites selected by March 2023, 
cumulative 50 sites by June 2023, 75 sites by September 2023, and finally all 100 new sites by December 2023.The project 
will coordinate closely with the Horn of Africa—Groundwater for Resilience Project (GW4R, P174867) to ensure 
complementarity. In communities where traditional technologies used in the Biyoole project as listed above are not 
feasible, the GW4R project may be requested to support the construction of boreholes.  
 
28 FMSs refer to Puntland, Galmudug, Hirshabelle, South West State, and Jubbaland. 
29 Dry river beds, also known as ‘toggas’. 
30 Water basin to store surface water (3–12 m³). It is an improved design that separates human and livestock offtake points. 
31 Earth dam at runoff concentrating flow path without clear stream bed, structures made of soil with a storing capacity of 3,000 m3 to 
12,000 m³. 
32 Construction Investment Reports are detailed feasibility studies prepared by the backstopping engineering firm. 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 62 
b. Subcomponent 1.2: Rehabilitation of existing water points (US$6 million IDA equivalent) 
23. 
This subcomponent will finance the rehabilitation of existing water infrastructure and small prioritized 
boreholes. Selected sites can include multiple interventions in terms of infrastructure and catchment protection to 
ensure adequate water through periods of drought and for multiple purposes. Facilities may be extended or expanded 
to increase water storage capacity. Given that it is not only the water infrastructure itself but the surrounding catchment, 
which is central to fostering drought and flood resilience, appropriate catchment protection measures need to be 
considered fully. Catchment interventions will be integrated into activities under Component 3. Increasing water storage 
capacity is a key component of building resilience to drought. In times of severe drought, emergency borehole 
rehabilitation will be fast tracked. 
c. Subcomponent 1.3: Institutional and capacity development (US$2.5 million IDA equivalent) 
24. 
This subcomponent will finance global learning exchanges and capacity-building activities for Somaliland, FGS, 
FMSs, and community structures to manage water points and prepare and institutionalize water sharing agreements, 
thereby making water shortages less likely, and the residents more resilient to droughts. The governing structures are 
responsible for planning and selecting sites, procuring works, overseeing the construction and rehabilitation of 
community water points, monitoring results, and undertaking hydrogeological monitoring for water development as well 
as developing government capacity to plan and design climate-resilient infrastructure. The criteria for site selection, 
design, and works planning will be based on consideration of low-carbon emissions, coupled with taking measures that 
increase resilience to floods and droughts, as per the needs of the specific geographic areas. This work will be guided by 
World Bank analytical33 work as well as consideration of acute need and social inclusivity. With the maturing of water 
services’ institutions, the foundation is laid to deepen water allocation discussions ensuring that services are provided 
equitably. Building on the Wadi Evaluation Tool (WET)34 developed under WALP, and modified during the Biyoole project 
and under the Barwaaqo project preparation, the project will pilot the application of an innovative web tool, the ‘water 
harvester explorer’, designed by the World Bank, and implemented in West Africa, to facilitate the selection of water 
harvesting interventions in the field.35 Somalia water technologies (as described above) are reproduced repeatedly and 
opportunity exists to explore more innovative water storage and water access options, which in turn will further enhance 
resilience of beneficiaries to droughts. Sustainability of water points is an area that needs deeper focus in Somalia, and 
more understanding of what the roles and responsibilities from community to state level are.  
25. 
To help ensure sustainability of investments, operations and maintenance (O&M) guidelines prepared under 
the Biyoole project will be strengthened under the project. The preparation of the guidelines initially drew on good 
practices from other contexts and was complemented by consultative workshops to review and validate the guidelines. 
While endeavors in this regard were initially acceptable, guidelines will be strengthened under the Barwaaqo project. 
Introductory information is needed regarding what the purpose of the document is, as well as key information on sites, 
such as year of construction, site characteristics, location, number of beneficiaries and users of the O&M guidelines. The 
 
33 World Bank. 2015. Macro-level study on the integrated development potential of sand-river wadis of Somaliland and Puntland. 
34 The WET is a site selection decision support tool for identifying potential for water harvesting infrastructure on a broad spatial scale. It 
is operated in the open source QGIS environment and is a model concept based on the spatial analysis of available remote sensing data. 
The spatial overlay is of up to 30 different thematic data layers. 
35 The ‘water harvesting explorer’ is a web tool that allows for exploration of opportunities for rainwater harvesting and water storage in 
the landscapes of the Western Sahel. It is important to integrate the hydrological objectives in the selection and design of interventions, 
especially in the semi-arid areas that are already facing acute water scarcity. Accordingly, the project will pilot the application of an 
innovative web tool designed by the World Bank to facilitate the selection of water harvesting interventions in the field. The web tool is 
developed with publicly available data and will be adapted for the project areas, with the aim of providing the users with a long list of water 
harvesting and storage interventions suitable for a given location. The tool will draw from many lessons already learned under the Biyoole 
project from developing and using the Wadi Evaluation Tool. The water harvest explorer can be accessed at https://sahel.acaciadata.com/  
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 62 
issues of who owns the infrastructure, operates it and manages it, and has the right to use the water will be of particular 
importance. Supported by the World Bank’s technical assistance, standardized O&M guidelines will be finalized, based 
on experiences from the Biyoole project, and adopted nationally. This process will contribute to the development of 
national policies for O&M.  
Component 2: Development of Agriculture and Livestock Services around Water Points (US$15.5 million IDA 
equivalent) 
26. 
This component will be implemented by the Ministries of Agriculture and Livestock in the FGS, FMSs, and 
Somaliland. It will support interventions aimed at creating and strengthening sustainable and productive livelihoods for 
communities around water points, ensuring that access to water translates into improved livelihoods while addressing 
vulnerabilities to flood and drought. By financing the integration of improved technologies for enhanced agricultural and 
livestock production, Component 2 activities will contribute to Pillar 1 of GCRF. It will scale up agriculture support services 
in the existing approximately 100 sites targeted by the Biyoole project where water infrastructure has already been 
installed and Community Investment Plans (CIPs) are available. In the 150 communities targeted in the Barwaaqo project, 
once the water points are constructed, the priority agricultural services as identified by the CIPs developed under 
Component 4.2 will be implemented. The agricultural activities supported by the project will improve food security and 
reduce the gender gap in agricultural and livestock productivity, as well as assets, through several measures targeted 
towards women and women-owned businesses and collectives. This component will provide the foundation for possible 
future support to Somali agriculture under the Regional Food Systems Resilience Program for Eastern and Southern Africa 
(P178566). 
a. Subcomponent 2.1: Increased sustainable farming production and development (US$7 million IDA 
equivalent) 
27. 
This subcomponent will finance the introduction of technologies, innovations, and management practices 
(TIMPs) related to improved water use efficiency and climate-smart agriculture to farm communities around each of 
the developed water points. The intention is to build up terrestrial carbon stocks while increasing the production of 
diversified agricultural products for improved household food security and incomes, and to increase the resilience of 
farmers to drought. TIMPs will be introduced using a community-based extension architecture and will include micro-
irrigation systems; high-yielding drought-tolerant seeds/planting materials, balanced soil fertility management; 
integrated pest management; and farm machinery for conservation agriculture and efficient harvest and post-harvest 
handling. The project will promote the use of TIMPs, which will hence incorporate climate-smart agricultural practices 
while reducing GHG emissions through activities like solar pumping, minimum soil tillage, and intercropping. The 
subcomponent will support mobilization and strengthening of farmers into common interest groups (CIGs) of 15–20 
members each and Farmer Producer Organizations, including female-led associations, cooperatives, and self-help groups, 
for ease of access to extension services, inputs, and output markets. Mobilization and subsequent support to CIGs will 
focus on high inclusion of female farmers and vulnerable member groups and development of resources and capacity at 
the community level for long term sustainability. Female extension agents will be engaged to facilitate access to extension 
services by female farmers, and female-led groups and collectives. Where possible, access to capital will be facilitated for 
female groups to improve their farm productions. This subcomponent will also support building a community-based 
extension ecosystem, complementing farmer-level interventions, and anchoring various promotional support for TIMPs’ 
adoption by farmers. To build a robust community-based extension architecture, the project will support the 
development of demonstration plots at each water point, identification and training of lead farmers tagged to CIGs for 
ongoing extension support and establishment of farmer field schools (FFS). The project will also invest in upgrading 
infrastructure for a community-based extension such as local tool banks, mini-labs, mobile service delivery systems, and 
digital infrastructure. Community-based extension facilitators will also be recruited to anchor FFS and function as 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 62 
mentors and master trainers to lead farmers. In addition to community-based extension facilitators at the FFS level, every 
CIG will be supported to identify best practicing lead farmers among themselves, with the strong encouragement of 
female lead farmers, who will be provided with intensive training support to deliver ongoing extension services to other 
group members. Participating farmers will then be provided with microproject grants at the CIG level to facilitate their 
adoption of climate smart TIMPs promoted under the project.  
28. 
Microproject investments will fall under four windows: (a) farmer-led irrigation development for farmers with 
access to developed water resources; (b) sustainable land management for farmers with rain-fed farms; (c) targeted 
support to vulnerable and marginalized groups (VMGs); and (d) nutrition mainstreaming. Eligible microproject activities 
must meet the expected outcomes criteria, including enhanced agricultural productivity, improved marketing and 
agribusiness, and sustainable management of natural resources. Microproject grants will be co-financed in cash and in-
kind, either using farmer’s own capital or under microcredit. Community contributions will depend on the nature of the 
micro-projects. For example, microprojects will support labor-intensive public works where feasible. The project’s grants 
will cover not only the required technical support services, training, and capacity strengthening activities, but also 
infrastructure, equipment, and inputs that have a high ‘public good’ element and a high-risk level. The training sessions 
will be offered at times and locations that are convenient to women given the demands for their time from other duties, 
and child-care will be provided to facilitate their participation. Where possible, the training on climate-smart agriculture 
will be designed to train family units together, which has been found to not only increase women’s access to training but 
also increase awareness among all family members of the role women play. Where necessary, community resource 
centers will be established to host meetings and training, as well as demonstrate new technologies/practices and 
improved crop varieties described above. Key messages on climate-smart agriculture will be developed and disseminated 
to community members using appropriate methods that consider the low literacy rate and that can facilitate female 
farmers’ access to the messages. Minority and marginalized groups will also be included where possible. The Ministries 
of Agriculture and Irrigation at FGS and FMS Levels, and Somaliland, will implement this subcomponent.  
b. Subcomponent 2.2: Increased sustainable livestock production and development (US$6.5 million IDA 
equivalent) 
29. 
This subcomponent will support the development and diversification of livelihoods among target pastoralist 
communities. It will facilitate improved grazing management, the demand-driven delivery of climate-smart livestock 
production assets, appropriate activities that enhance carbon stock, and extension services based on community-specific 
priorities and context-specific conditions. Based on CIPs developed and prioritized livelihoods, the Ministries of Water 
will be supported to estimate water availability and water use demand for animal consumption and poultry production. 
Training on climate-smart livestock management will be offered by the Ministries of Livestock for family units to increase 
female participation. The project will train and deploy female extension agents and veterinarians to support female 
livestock keepers and facilitate the formation of inclusive cooperatives and self-help groups. Where possible, access to 
capital will be facilitated by the Ministries of Livestock to enable female pastoralist groups to improve animal stock. The 
subcomponent will build on significant gains realized under the Biyoole project in animal husbandry and veterinary 
services. Like subcomponent 2.1, support will be provided by the Ministries of Livestock for the mobilization and 
strengthening of pastoralist communities into strong farmer institutions to help access animal health and production 
extension services, inputs, and markets. Pastoralist field schools will be established to intensify the training of farmers 
on fodder production and management, animal health and disease control, and rangeland management. Microproject 
grants will be provided at the CIG level to support participating farmers to adopt promoted technologies—including but 
not limited to improved drought-tolerant breeds; dairy farming; improved animal finishing; fodder production and 
management, and improved animal health and disease control. The Ministry of Livestock at FGS and FMS levels, and 
Somaliland, will implement this subcomponent. 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 62 
c. Subcomponent 2.3: Institutional and capacity development (US$2 million IDA equivalent)  
30. 
This subcomponent will strengthen the FGS and FMSs, Somaliland government, as well as the Ministries that 
are responsible for agriculture and livestock, to create an enabling environment for agriculture and animal husbandry. 
This will build their capacity to boost food security and livelihoods’ development among rural communities as well as 
their capacity to plan and design climate-resilient interventions that support sustainable agricultural and livestock 
production. This subcomponent will strengthen the capacity of national and state institutions to plan, implement, and 
monitor integrated agriculture and livestock development programs. It will finance the establishment of a coherent 
agriculture (farming and livestock) extension ecosystem that combines public, private, and community-led extension 
services. It will also provide targeted support to improve linkages between the nascent agricultural research system to 
the community-based extension ecosystem to be developed, thereby supporting farmers with context specific climate-
smart agro-weather and market advisories. To the extent possible, the subcomponent will also support agriculture 
digitization, including geo-tagged registration of participating farmers, digitization of prioritized TIMPs for delivery to 
farmers, and provision of digital agriculture solutions to targeted farmers. Building on ongoing pilot work under the 
Biyoole project, the focus on digital agriculture will incorporate access to solar-powered irrigation systems, the provision 
of e-extension and advisory services, bundled with digitally enabled access to inputs and technologies to improve 
productivity. Other agro-tech innovations include access to finance and marketing of livestock and farm produce from 
targeted farming and pastoral communities. It will also focus on capacity building on climate-smart agriculture 
technologies and support to women and youth as e-extension service providers. In addition, the subcomponent will 
include targeted exposure visits to neighboring countries to learn from similar work. Enhancing the institutional and 
regulatory capacity of Somali institutions will ultimately lead to increased resilience to floods and droughts by ensuring 
that the necessary knowledge and skills are embedded in government, rather than mainly with external agencies.  
Component 3: Development of Environmental Catchment Services in Project Areas (US$10 million IDA equivalent) 
31. 
This component will be implemented by the Ministries of Environment in the FGS, FMSs, and Somaliland. It 
aims to address vulnerabilities to extreme climate events and enhance the benefits from the sustainable management 
of catchments in project areas. It includes the promotion of rangelands restoration (thus contributing to Land 
Degradation Neutrality) and introduction of appropriate practices for Sustainable Land Management (SLM) (thus 
reinforcing national climate mitigation measures to increase forest cover and SOC). More specifically, increased 
vegetation cover, riverbank protection, and promotion of water storage will contribute to mitigate the impacts of 
flooding, while soil and water conservation techniques reduce soil loss and increase soil moisture content and thus help 
to reduce vulnerability to droughts. The project will invest in efforts to restore ecosystems and mitigate, as well as adapt 
to, climate change. This will not only improve livelihoods and contribute to poverty reduction, but also help to mitigate 
the effects of Somalia’s variable climate. It will increase the much-needed water harvesting opportunities—key to 
increasing water security and, thus, communities’ resilience to droughts. It will further strengthen the capacity of the 
different government and community institutions to develop and implement environmental activities and regulations. 
Furthermore, through building climate-resilient infrastructure and practices, Component 3 activities will contribute to 
Pillar 4—Strengthening Policies, Institutions and Investments for Rebuilding Better—of the GCRF. The Directorate of 
Environment and Climate Change at FGS level, and the Ministries of Environment at FMS levels and Somaliland, will 
implement this component. This component will complement the Somalia Climate Change Program (P176246), which 
aims to strengthen and mainstream climate change actions in rural water and agricultural projects, and urban and 
infrastructure investments. 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 62 
a. Subcomponent 3.1: Environmental restoration (US$8 million IDA equivalent)  
32. 
This subcomponent aims to support ecosystem restoration interventions while enhancing the livelihoods of 
beneficiary communities around the water point, and addressing land degradation, flooding, and desertification. There 
will be an emphasis on climate mitigation measures such as increasing carbon stocks, and climate adaptation measures, 
particularly those that mitigate against extreme climate events. The subcomponent will finance nature-based solutions 
and approaches to SLM at micro and macro levels, such as: the regeneration of naturally growing trees, increasing SOC, 
regeneration of shrubs and grasses; local (village) level approved rules and regulations for use and sanctions; restoration 
of degraded and severely destroyed ecosystems; the promotion of suitable water harvesting for soil and water 
conservation techniques (for example, semi-circular bunds, soil bunds, and rock catchments); promotion of improved 
rangeland management and assessments and surveys of soil and erosion. It will consider ecosystem-based adaptation 
(EbA), a win-win approach that uses ecosystem services as part of a holistic adaptation strategy. This may include, for 
example, socioeconomically and ecologically viable species producing nontimber forest products for commercial 
extraction while minimizing the risks of environmental destruction. To avoid decreasing downstream water availability 
and to increase upstream productivity, the project will introduce techniques to manage invasive plant species. The 
subcomponent will consider sedimentation, dry season water flows, flood reduction, broader disaster risk reduction, and 
will work closely with local government for planning and monitoring. The subcomponent includes technical assistance 
and support to the capital investments for financing market-based mechanisms that support the above. 
b. Subcomponent 3.2: Institutional and capacity development (US$2 million IDA equivalent)  
33. 
This subcomponent will strengthen the capacity of the FGS, FMSs, and Somaliland governments on 
environmental protection, and the development and implementation of nature-based solutions and SLM practices. 
The aim is for them to support social and environmental protection, enhance resilience to extreme climate events, 
particularly droughts and floods, reduce land-based GHG emissions and ultimately optimize the usage of the country’s 
natural resources. It will also raise awareness about the natural resource conditions and climate variability, as well as 
how these link to the livelihood opportunities financed under Component 2. Basic resources will be put in place (offices, 
equipment, staff) forming the foundation for environmental management. This subcomponent will explore opportunities 
for partnering with national and international organizations36 that specialize in water and soil monitoring, climate 
adaptation and climate mitigation. It will also monitor key elements (for example, change in organic matter, soil 
composition, and vegetation cover) over an extended period, and link this to the precipitation pattern to have an 
assessment of the performances of the water point, ideas for improving those in the future, and to contribute to 
strengthening future climate change adaptation processes. Monitoring systems for land degradation, dynamic mapping, 
and early warning systems, such as Hydromet,37 and enhanced early warning systems developed by Somali institutions, 
such as the Somalia Water and Land Information System, will be utilized to promote resilience to extreme climate events 
and monitor changes in soil organic and above-ground carbon stocks, thereby also helping government institutions be 
better prepared and respond to extreme climate events. Communities will be consulted regarding community labor and 
modalities preferred, for example, volunteer contributions or cash for work. Enabling conditions, local leadership, culture 
and common law (known as Xeer in Somali culture) volunteering antecedents, and social mobilization experiences will 
guide the choice of implementation modality. The project will consider that rehabilitation works, soil conservation 
measures, and nature-based solutions require significant cheap labor; the procurement designs of these activities require 
special attention. Cash injection into communities provides immediate benefits but can create long term dependency 
problems which will reduce sustainability. The pros and cons will be unpacked in the early stages of community 
 
36 For example: University of Mogadishu and the Global Center for Adaptation: https://gca.org/  
37 Hydromet services provide real-time weather, water, early warning, and climate information products to end users, based on weather, 
water, and climate data.  
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 62 
engagement and mobilization. The project will support the construction or rehabilitation of Ministry of Environment 
buildings. Access to climate financing or adaptation funds is important to mitigate climate change and the project will 
support the development of relevant project proposals. 
Component 4: Project Management, Community Development, and Enhancing Livelihoods Planning (US$17.5 million 
IDA equivalent)  
34. 
This component will be implemented by the Ministries of Planning in the FGS, FMSs, and Somaliland. This 
component, coordinated through the Ministries of Planning, will finance the operational costs of the project management 
units in Somaliland and FMSs and a national project coordinator and fiduciary support unit at the FGS level. Aligned with 
Pillar 4 of the GCRF, this component will support the strengthening of policies, institutions and investments for 
‘Rebuilding Better to improve long-term development.’ The project will develop policies at a national level and implement 
these policies through the sectoral line ministries implementation strategies in the FMS. This will enable a process of 
standardization of implementation that will connect national policy to community activities thereby building institutions 
and capacity and promoting sustainable growth. The successful targeting of beneficiaries and the achievement of 
improved water balance, access and management, adoption of SLM practices, select indicators for soil moisture and/or 
SOC (as appropriate), enhanced agricultural productivity, as well as gender and nutrition-related outcomes will be among 
the main performance indicators to be monitored. To promote livelihoods development around water points and 
implement Components 1 to 3, this component will also support the development of village profiles, ensure inclusivity 
through mapping of marginalized or disadvantaged groups such as occupational minorities and other marginalized groups 
and including their needs in CIPs. It will support monitoring and evaluation (M&E), knowledge management and learning, 
and Security Risk Management.38 By facilitating women’s participation in the CIPs’ preparation, the project will enhance 
women’s participation in decision-making processes, thus addressing a gender gap.  
a. Subcomponent 4.1: Project management (US$10 million IDA equivalent)  
35. 
This subcomponent will ensure that the project is implemented efficiently, on time, and in accordance with the 
Financing Agreement. This will be the responsibility of the National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) at the Federal level 
and Project Implementation Units (PIUs) at state levels. The NPCU at the Federal level and PIUs of Puntland, South West, 
and Galmudug and the PIU in Somaliland, were already established under the Biyoole project. The PIUs for Jubbaland 
and Hirshabelle will be set up under the project. This subcomponent will support (a) the incremental operating costs for 
ministry staff managing the project and for inputs from other technical ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs: 
water, livestock and agriculture, environment); (b) the cost of procurement and financial management (FM) specialists 
and the development of procurement guidelines for contractors giving extra points in bidding to female friendly firms; 
and (c) outreach and communications on the governments’ role and leadership on the project to the broader Somali 
community. 
b. Subcomponent 4.2: Community-driven development (CDD) planning (US$1.2 million IDA equivalent) 
  
36. 
The CDD approach introduced under the Biyoole project will be developed further in the project. This 
subcomponent will refine institutional responsibilities and support the Ministries of Planning in their mandates of 
overseeing development from State to district to community level. The multisectoral nature of the project, and the need 
for cross ministry coordination for multisectoral support for economically viable and resilient communities, require the 
PIUs to manage community engagement. A CDD approach remains highly relevant for this project given the 
 
38 Sites in areas or states considered to be high-risk will be subjected to Security Risk Assessments (SRA). This will also cover engagement 
of security risk management where necessary. 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 62 
interdependency focus on rural, local area development, and natural resources management, and pulls together the 
activities under Components 1, 2, and 3 into one holistic livelihoods development project. It will also deepen 
familiarization of communities to the principles of women and youth as agents of change, inclusion, and transparency, 
building on successes and experience achieved in the current project. Expertise in CDD and CIPs will be contracted to 
build the capacity of the Ministries of Planning, which have limited expertise in managing and delivering CDD. 
 
37. 
Community mobilization and planning. Community development specialists housed in the PIUs, along with the 
focal points from the technical line ministries, will use the community engagement guidelines developed under the 
Biyoole project to discuss options for use of the water asset, duly considering local precipitation patterns and hydrology 
to avoid maladaptation, and then to develop CIPs to support its sustainable use. Each state government and Somaliland 
will oversee the community mobilization process, which will engage communities throughout the project to help them 
identify their priority water interventions (costs and benefits of different technologies), how they will manage their water 
infrastructure, and how the community will use the water to increase their food security and income opportunities. Given 
capacity and human resource constraints at the state level, the project will provide funds to contract implementation 
support of the mobilization activity. The approach will bring together all members of a village, ensuring the inclusion of 
all stakeholder groups, for example, pastoralists, irrigation farmers, rainfed farmers, landless laborers, women, and 
youth. The 50 CIPs developed under the Biyoole project will be revisited and updated based on the evolution of 
community needs, and 150 new CIPs will be developed in the new sites identified under this project.  
38. 
Engagement of Village Development Committees (VDCs) right from the early stages of water point identification 
will be a cornerstone of community engagement to ensure local ownership of the asset and envisaged livelihood 
activities. This early engagement of the VDC, along with continued involvement of local authorities from the different 
sectors, will help to maintain the support and momentum of the planned activities. Community facilitators trained by the 
Community Development Specialists will facilitate CIP discussions to promote ownership. The project team will ensure 
that a minimum 30 percent of the trained facilitators are female. The CIP female facilitators will receive additional 
sessions on leadership to increase their capacity to promote active participation of women in the CIP discussions. The 
gender specialist of the project will assist the CIP female facilitators to develop awareness-raising messages on women’s 
knowledge and experience in water management and the importance and benefits of women’s participation and 
leadership in community level organizations and discussions. The CIP female facilitators will also lead women-only 
sessions to discuss and propose CIP priorities. The diagram below (Figure 2) depicts how the Ministries of Planning will 
engage with communities and coordinate service delivery by line ministries. 
 
39. 
Coordination with large regional projects, in particular the Ground Water for Resilience Project (GW4R) and the 
Food Systems Resilience Project (FSRP, P178566), is essential. Formalized coordination platforms will be hosted by the 
Ministries of Planning NPCU at FGS and FMSs’ PIUs. At FMS level, the Biyoole project has built capacity to implement 
projects in the sectoral line ministries—it may be possible that the line ministries’ PIUs can manage the implementation 
of both the Biyoole and the GW4R projects in the case or the Ministries of Water and Ministries of Agriculture and 
Livestock for FSRP. This will save on costs and institutionalize coordination; the Ministries of Planning Biyoole PIUs can 
facilitate dialogue in this regard. The Barwaaqo project coordinators will provide technical advisory support to the GW4R 
and the FSRP; this advisory support will be mentoring in nature and focused on guiding new project coordinators in 
implementation of World Bank projects. At community level the primary entry level that should be leveraged by all 
projects is the VDC, this is the central community organization for development planning and implementation. The 
Biyoole project’s PIUs housed in the ministries will ensure that coordination with other projects is done well. There are 
mutually benefitting opportunities for all projects, and coordination followed by consultations on design and 
implementation information sharing will help to increase resilience levels. In the early stages of project mobilization, the 
PIUs will host workshops with the GW4R and the FSRP projects to discuss community mobilization, collaboration, and 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 62 
planning. The project will draw social safety net and inclusion learnings from the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human 
Capital Project (P178730) and will share experiences with the Strengthening Social Cohesion, Inclusion and Resilience 
through Community Institutions Project (P179287). The use of CDD methodologies and preparation of CIPs are the tools 
that will be used as ways to organize working across projects. 
40. 
The project will support continuous learning and adaptable knowledge management, using the Ministry of 
Planning’s web-based management information system (MIS) and M&E systems. A web-based MIS will be set up to 
track real-time performance of the project and is linked to an M&E system to focus on project results and outcomes, 
including sex-disaggregation of staffing, training, and other project data. This subcomponent will finance baseline, 
concurrent monitoring of inputs and outputs and monitoring of Environmental and Social (E&S) aspects, conflict, and 
gender, and will focus on developing and disseminating knowledge generated through various project activities. 
Subcomponent activities will incorporate new modern technology such as geo-tagging of site investments, collection of 
field data with tablets/smartphones, and application of geospatial imaging for quantifying before-and-after comparisons 
for specific indicators. With a view to obtain more information and knowledge on the extent and period of flood, this 
subcomponent will support technical work such as flood mapping and support to information sharing. Thus, improved 
availability and quality of data from the monitoring network will be essential while planning for, and responding to, 
climate change vulnerabilities. 
 
Figure 2. Community-Driven Development 
 
 
c. Subcomponent 4.3: M&E, knowledge management, and learning (US$6.3 million IDA equivalent) 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 62 
41. 
Given the nascent institutional capacity of multisectoral rural resilience in Somalia, additional layers of support 
are helpful. This subcomponent will allow the FGS to engage a suitably qualified and experienced international 
independent firm to provide quality enhancement and implementation support to the project. The objective of the 
support will be to provide additional and independent monitoring and quality assurance, ensuring that project funds are 
used for the purposes specified in the project financing agreement. The firm will be contracted by the FGS and will support 
Somali authorities to fulfill their monitoring and supervision obligations with respect to all four project components. The 
firm will also be responsible for monitoring the development of capacity within recipient organizations and agencies such 
that it advises on capacity-building needs to carry out the FM, procurement, and project management obligations. 
d. Subcomponent 4.4: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0) 
42. 
Contingent Emergency Response Component. This subcomponent will support immediate and rapid response to 
an eligible crisis or emergency, as needed. This zero-cost component will finance eligible expenditures under the 
Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) in the case of natural or manmade crises or disasters, severe economic shocks, 
or other crises and emergencies in Somalia. It can be triggered through formal declaration of a national emergency by 
the government authority and upon a formal request from the Federal Republic of Somalia (FRS) to the World Bank 
through the Ministry of Finance (MoF). 
43. 
In such cases, funds from any of the other project components will be reallocated to finance emergency response 
expenditures to meet agricultural crises and emergency needs. The emergency response would include mitigation, 
recovery, and reconstruction following crises and disasters, such as severe droughts, floods, disease outbreaks, and 
landslides, among others. Implementation of this subcomponent will follow a detailed Contingent Emergency Response 
Implementation Plan satisfactory to the World Bank that will be prepared for each eligible emergency.  
44. 
A CERC manual will be prepared within the first three months following project effectiveness, and will include 
implementation arrangements for (a) structures or institutional arrangements for coordinating and implementing the 
CERC; (b) specific activities, eligible expenditures required, and any procedures for their inclusion; (c) financial 
management arrangements; (d) procurement methods and procedures; (e) documentation required for withdrawals of 
Financing amounts to finance Emergency Expenditures; (f) a description of the environmental and social assessment and 
management arrangements for the Contingent Emergency Response Part; and (g) a template Emergency Action Plan. The 
Project Operations Manual (POM) will have a dedicated annex for a CERC in line with the October 2017 guidelines.  
Table 1. Project Budget 
Project Components 
 Subtotal (in US$) 
% Split Per 
Component  
Component 1. Development of Multiuse Water Sources 
1.1 Construction of new water points  
17,800,000    
1.2 Rehabilitation of existing water points  
6,000,000    
1.3 Institutional and capacity development  
2,500,000    
Total component budget 
26,300,000  38% 
Component 2. Development of Agriculture and Livestock Services around Water Points 
2.1 Increased sustainable farming production and development 
7,000,000    
2.2 Increased sustainable livestock production and development  
6,500,000    
2.3 Institutional and capacity development  
2,000,000    
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 62 
Project Components 
 Subtotal (in US$) 
% Split Per 
Component  
Total component budget 
15,500,000  22% 
Component 3. Development of Environmental Catchment Services in Project Areas 
3.1 Environmental restoration  
8,000,000    
3.2 Institutional and capacity development 
2,000,000    
Total component budget 
10,000,000  14% 
Component 4. Project Management, Community-Driven Development, and Enhancing Livelihoods Planning 
4.1 Project management 
10,000,000    
4.2 Community-driven development planning 
1,200,000    
4.3 Monitoring and evaluation, knowledge management, and learning  
6,300,000    
4.4 Contingent Emergency Response 
–     
Total component budget 
17,500,000  25% 
Subtotal of the components  
69,300,000  99% 
Contingency  
700,000  1% 
TOTAL  
70,000,000  100% 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
45. 
The primary project beneficiaries are the more than 500,000 rural people (of which 175,000 are women) in 
Galmudug, Puntland, South West State, Hirshabelle, Jubbaland, and Somaliland. The project will provide benefits in the 
form of access to improved water sources for multiple uses (domestic, livestock, agriculture, horticulture, environmental 
strengthening); agricultural extension services (livestock and crops); improved livelihood resilience; and adaptive know-
how. 
46. 
In Somalia, women and children are typically responsible at the household level for collecting water. Access to 
improved water supply and sanitation facilities is expected to contribute to poverty reduction and better gender equality 
among the beneficiary populations by addressing burdens borne by women and girls. This includes the benefits of 
reduced time and effort spent in collecting water, as well as associated benefits such as personal security, health, and 
economic productivity. The project will emphasize the role of women in the decision-making process at various stages of 
system design, implementation, and management. To maximize inclusion in decision making, implementation, and 
benefits, the project will identify beneficiaries affected with disability, so they are included in the design of the 
infrastructure, in the prioritization of livelihoods, and in linking to assistive services. 
47. 
Given the large role that women play in both agriculture and livestock activities, the project will address 
challenges that have traditionally limited women’s productivity, particularly access to extension services and inputs. 
Drawing on lessons from ongoing agro-pastoral investments in Somalia, the project will reserve 20 percent of leadership 
positions for women in VDCs that participate in the project, while also supporting targeted and culturally-sensitive 
outreach and engagement strategies through PIUs and trained female facilitators to enhance women’s voice in decision-
making and planning processes, especially in areas where female participation is lacking. An audit of processes will be 
conducted to determine risk points where women tend to be excluded, for example, selection for asset transfers and 
labor-intensive public works. Other training will be designed and delivered at times and in locations that are convenient 
to women given the demands on their time from other duties, and childcare will be provided to facilitate their 
participation. Acknowledging women’s low levels of education and literacy, training materials will be customized for low 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 62 
literacy groups. The POM will clarify how this is going to be tracked. 
48. 
The Somalia Country Economic Memorandum 2021, ‘Towards an Inclusive Jobs Agenda’,39 outlines how job 
creation is a top priority for growth, development, and social stability in Somalia (refer to Box 1 on ‘Climate, Water, 
and Growth in Somalia’). By mobilizing and empowering women and youth as positive agents of change and supporting 
the growth and development of rural livelihoods, the project will help address key drivers of intergenerational poverty 
and conflict. In project areas, the construction of infrastructure (for example, dams, offices, and community centers) and 
related procurement of goods and services will create new jobs and revenue streams for local businesses. Environmental 
management and livelihood support interventions and cash for work programs under Components 2 and 3 will provide 
communities and households with crucial productive assets and income-generating opportunities. Core project 
interventions will be complemented by targeted investments in mobilizing and capacitating women and youth groups to 
engage in diversified income-generating activities, provision of animal health and nutrition services, and community 
gardening. The project will also explore income-enhancing opportunities through value addition and, where feasible, 
linking communities with surplus production to downstream markets. 
 
39 World Bank. 2021. Somalia Country Economic Memorandum. 
Box 1. Climate, Water, and Growth in Somalia 
Climate change has contributed to extreme weather events in Somalia, such as recurrent droughts and floods. These 
extreme conditions affect agricultural production due to crop failure and low vegetation, contributing to food 
insecurity and displacement. Without sufficient water, Somalia will not be able to develop agricultural value chains, 
which can be a source of diversification to support growth. Some of the key challenges around water management in 
Somalia are related to inadequate infrastructure, poorly managed public services, and inadequate water resources. 
Urbanization trends highlight the need, in the long term, for increased investment in urban water and sanitation 
supply. 
 
Recognizing the importance of the water sector, the Federal Government of Somalia approved the National Water 
Resource Strategy 2021–2025. The Strategy includes the policy and institutional reforms required to develop the 
sector, such as a new Water Bill and the establishment of interministerial cooperation structures. Given the vast water 
infrastructure needed, the Strategy also advocates for a water sector financing policy, a systematic prioritization of 
investments, as well as disaster risk reduction schemes. Within Somalia, major investments are needed to diversify 
water supply sources, water use efficiency, and improve the coverage of water and sanitation services in rural and 
urban areas. Investments are currently largely supported by official development assistance and the implementation 
of the Strategy will support the sector to provide country-led oversight and coordination. 
 
Within the Horn of Africa, further investments and collaboration are needed to manage water supply. Watershed 
management in rangelands is crucial for the Horn of Africa nomadic communities’ resilience, and transboundary 
groundwater aquifers hold immense potential for water provision in the Horn of Africa. 
 
Source: Somalia Country Economic Memorandum (2021). 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 62 
D. Results Chain 
49. 
The Projects Results Chain is presented in Figure 3. Rural communities in Somalia’s drylands suffer 
challenges relating to lack of access to water, agriculture, and environmental services. Government capacity to 
manage water, agriculture, livestock, and environmental resources requires strengthening, and institutional 
challenges remain also at community level. Activities will address these constraints, and include the development 
of infrastructures (water points), the financing of SLM practices, and the enhancement of soft skills for extension 
service, rangeland management, and community mobilization. In the medium term, this will contribute to the 
provision of water, agriculture, and environmental services, in turn increasing public, community and ecosystem 
resilience to drought and floods, sustainable use of productive resources, increased food availability, increased 
dietary diversity and increased income and improved rural livelihoods. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 62 
Figure 3. Theory of Change  
PDO: To develop water, agriculture, and environmental services for rural communities in Somalia’s drylands. 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 62 
Figure 4. Illustrative Depiction of Turning Sand into Water and Building Rural Resilience 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sand dam construction retains 
sand behind it, which holds 
water in the subsurface  
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 62 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
50. 
Building country systems is essential. As described in Section C on ‘Relevance to Higher Level Objectives’, while 
other donor countries and agencies have gone a long way in financing rural community-based resilience via UN programs, 
nongovernmental organizations, and/or private sector contractors, the World Bank offers its experience in building state 
institutions, financing state budgets, and embarking on multisectoral/multistakeholder programs. Through this project, 
the World Bank will help ensure progress toward its twin goals of ending extreme poverty and increasing the incomes of 
rural poor. The rural poor are predominantly pastoralist or agro-pastoralist, and the agro-livestock contributes 
significantly to strengthening Somali food security while, at the same time, contributing to poverty alleviation through 
improved livelihoods of rural citizens. Improving livestock practices is more sustainable and less risky to animal and 
human health. In addition to providing basic water services, and improving livelihoods and eco-systems, the project has 
the additional benefit of creating jobs in these sectors, thus contributing to linking the rural economy to the urban 
economy through agriculture and livestock added value processing opportunities.  
 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
51. 
The design of the project has considered lessons learned from the World Bank’s engagement in fragile and 
conflict settings in general, and directly in Somalia during the past three to seven years. More importantly, the project 
design is based on lessons from the Water for Agro-Pastoralist (WALP) pilot (P152024) and the Biyoole project. These 
lessons include the following. 
52. 
The multisectoral aspect of the project remains at the heart of the project’s strength but lessons in coordination 
and collaboration have been learned, such as the importance of intergovernmental liaison and consultation. Chief 
among them is that the community-driven development, engagement, and preparation of CIPs should be coordinated at 
the PIU level in the Ministries of Planning to avoid the perpetuation of sectoral silos. As such, under the project, these 
activities and associated staff will be situated in the Ministries of Planning and not the Ministries of Environment where 
they are situated in the Biyoole project, which has caused confusion over institutional responsibilities and has distracted 
the Ministries of Environment from their core business of providing environmental services. The sectoral meetings that 
have been initiated and organized in the Biyoole project are encouraged to continue under the project on an annual basis 
to enhance the collaboration between the similar federal and state ministries. 
53. 
The use of country systems has multiple advantages. The Biyoole project is building the capacity of FGS and FMS 
institutions to deliver water services for improved livelihoods in rural communities, and this project is expected to further 
this effort. Reestablishing a limited but core public sector role in agricultural innovation would help reintegrate markets 
for private goods with support for public goods and extend the reach of services across the country. Over the past decade 
the private sector role in agriculture has grown. For example, commercial suppliers market new seed varieties and private 
associations of veterinary practitioners provide animal health services. The growing role of the private sector has spurred 
agricultural knowledge and innovation for private goods where there is good access to urban markets (for example, for 
veterinary drugs, improved seeds, and fertilizers). While much aid has also been channeled to public goods and 
knowledge (for example, climate-smart land management technologies to improve soil, water, and rangelands 
management) through the UN and civil society organizations to more remote areas, this has largely bypassed nascent 
public sector institutions and constrained the public sector role. Reintroducing a core public sector role in agricultural 
innovation is essential to helping traditional rural livelihoods adapt to climate change—it could help drive innovation in 
the growing horticulture sector and develop new markets for fodder to buffer times when pasture is scarce. 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 62 
54. 
Under the Biyoole project there is a standalone component for institutional strengthening, and it should be 
included separately into each component instead of being a standalone component. Lessons learned show that it is 
better from both technical and budgeting perspectives that each ministry, and therefore each component (because 
components are institutionally aligned), are responsible for their own institutional strengthening. Institutional 
strengthening that is cross-cutting (for example, project management and leadership development, procurement, FM 
and safeguards training), will be procured/provided centrally. The contracting of backstopping engineering support, third 
party monitoring and security assessments will also be done centrally to ensure standardization and cost benefits from 
economies of scale. 
55. 
Budgeting needs to be detailed and coordinated centrally. Budget activities under the project should have 
detailed input and cost computation notes. If activities are not disaggregated in detail, it hinders implementation whilst 
ministries try to figure out what exactly to do. Time spent developing detailed budgets with activities under each 
component placed correctly, and allocation per component well considered during budgeting will help implementation. 
Prepared in advance of project implementation and approved on achievement of effectiveness, a five-year budget is to 
be held at the FGS level, annual budget plans from the five-year budget are to be prepared by each state and submitted 
to the FGS’ NPCU to align them to the five-year project budget before submission. Budgets will be updated every six 
months; budgets will be prepared by the FMS’ PIUs and NPCU and submitted for World Bank clearance in September of 
each calendar year ahead of the government budget schedule. 
56. 
The project will strengthen the relationship between the FGS and Federal Members’ state/line ministries and 
intrastate. The project initiated and implemented specific sectoral meetings and workshops which were held in the 
participating FMSs but led by the federal line ministries. This has increased intergovernmental collaboration between the 
federal and state ministries within the project implementation and follow-up with the activities by the sectors. 
Standardized site and community selection criteria must be agreed to and, within this criteria, political factors must be 
100 percent free from initial selections—besides demand, the other factors to be considered are water demand, number 
of beneficiaries, accessibility, and geographical areas (in terms of reachability). 
57. 
Community mobilization and maintaining momentum of planned activities requires sustained engagement. 
Rural resilience is not a one-time activity, it requires champions and solid community engagement. In the WALP project 
(P152024), community expectations for water provision were raised only to discover that technically there would be 
problems with building sand dams in certain areas. In the Biyoole project, initial community engagement was, at first, 
focusing on engineering aspects and technical in nature until the Ministry of Water had confirmed the feasibility of sites, 
and only after the feasibility of a site was confirmed did full community engagement proceed. The community 
engagement strategy developed in Biyoole will be rolled out earlier with the VDCs, and more comprehensively, and there 
will be continuous involvement of local authorities from different sectors throughout the duration of the project.  
58. 
Gender involvement and empowerment are fundamental to the project and will be mainstreamed at all levels—
from the implementing entity level to the beneficiaries. The Biyoole project benefited from having cross-cutting and 
sectoral integration with women. Women’s participation in the project activities and decision making at all levels of the 
project will continue to be strengthened. This is key to the success of the interventions. An additional lesson learned is 
that there needs to be a specific strategy in place, and a gender champion, to ensure females are recruited for PIU 
positions. With the Biyoole project, it was difficult to find experienced and qualified candidates; the project developed 
female trainee recruitment guidelines and established an internship program to build up a female candidate base. Under 
the Barwaaqo project, these activities will be anchored in a wider female recruitment and retention strategy to support 
increased women’s employment in participating line ministries as well as public and private water institutions and PIUs. 
Procurement guidelines will give extra points in bids to female-friendly contractors. 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 62 
59. 
Contractors’ and service providers’ skills remain weak and the NPCU and PIUs should plan to conduct training 
sessions for contractors and service providers. There has been an improvement, particularly in Puntland, of contractor 
capacity to bid for and implement World Bank–financed projects; however, there is still a long way to go. This was a 
lesson learned in the WALP pilot (P152024) and the Biyoole project planned to address this problem. The Coronavirus 
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, however, undermined plans to deepen contractor skills because World Bank procurement 
staff were not able to travel and provide on-the-ground training. Efforts will be made under the project to strengthen the 
private sector by developing contractor skills to understand bidding documents.  
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
60. 
Project locations. The project will be a fully national project implemented in all five FMSs (Puntland, Galmudug, 
Hirshabelle, South West State, and Jubbaland) and Somaliland. Systemized approaches will be followed to select project 
areas; prioritization criteria based on areas of extreme water scarcity, availability of sustainable water and drought 
susceptibility will be the driving factors. In Somaliland and all FMSs, the relevant disaster management agencies will be 
consulted regarding communities most in need, and these will be overlaid with the relevant national development plans 
to determine project locations. To provide water, agriculture, and environment services to the people in the regions of 
Sool and Sanaag—where there is a lack of clarity regarding administrative responsibility—the Federal Government will 
contract third party implementers. Funds to the value of US$3 million for a total of eight sites has been ringfenced for 
these areas from project budgets. 
61. 
Implementation arrangements will remain as per the Biyoole project, except for the CDD approach which will 
be implemented by the Ministries of Planning. The existing and established Federal Inter-Ministerial Steering 
Committee, NPCU and the State PIUs’, and Somaliland model will continue to serve the Barwaaqo project. The project 
will be implemented by the existing Ministries of Planning—lead coordinating ministry and responsible for Component 
4; existing Ministries of Water/relevant agencies, for example, PWDA in Puntland—Component 1; existing Ministries of 
Agriculture and Livestock—Component 2; and existing Ministries of Environment—Component 3. All four components 
will be implemented in each Barwaaqo project community in Somaliland and the FMSs, meaning that every Barwaaqo 
project community will be developed with water, agriculture, and environmental services. The NPCU will support 
Hirshabelle and Jubbaland to establish the PIUs under their Ministries of Planning; lessons learned under the current 
project will be used to increase staff skills, build capacity, and mitigate risks. At the FGS level, the Ministry of Planning 
will have FM, procurement, M&E, social/community development, gender/gender-based violence (GBV), 
communication, environmental, security, and water specialists. State-level and Somaliland PIUs will replicate this 
structure; some roles, however, will be merged. Given the limited capacity at the municipal level, the project will support 
building the capacity of the districts and village development community management committees. An External 
Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS) unit already exists in the Ministry of Finance based in Mogadishu and at FMS levels 
that manages the designated accounts and project accounts. 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 62 
Figure 5. Organizational Flow of Services and Project Resources from Federal Government to Community Level 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
‘Barwaaqo’ Second Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P177627) 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 62 
62. 
The role of districts and communities is critical in the management of rural resilience infrastructure projects. 
The FGS prepared community engagement operational guidelines as a comprehensive guide to the processes and 
procedures for engaging and working with the communities participating in the Biyoole project. These will be revisited 
and updated for the Barwaaqo project —this is particularly important given that the mandate for the CDD approach has 
moved to the Ministries of Planning. Using these guidelines, this project will support building the capacity of the districts 
and community management committees. A project steering committee that tracks project implementation progress 
and provides support and guidance as required at the Federal level is established. State-level project steering committees 
will be established to provide oversight and guidance at the FMS level. The Ministries of Planning will play a coordination 
role in community engagement and development to ensure inter-agency linkages are enhanced. O&M of water points is 
particularly critical and the local government, in this case the District Council, where the community is located, will be 
handed over the responsibility of the O&M of the water point, and its related infrastructure developed under the project. 
Districts with council structures in Somaliland and Puntland will be started as pilot districts and the capacity of the districts 
will be developed for the O&M of the infrastructures in close collaboration with the target community. Lessons from 
these pilots will contribute to the O&M guidelines to be developed under Component 1. 
63. 
Strengthening institutional infrastructure and operations is essential. To boost institutional capacity and support 
to relevant government entities that lack adequate budgetary allocations, the project’s budget will allow for the 
procurement of vehicles, office supplies and equipment, and renovation and/or building of dilapidated or nonexistent 
office buildings. This aspect plays into the institutional capacity development dimension at the core of the project. Project 
staff’s competency to draft quality work plans, Procurement Plans (PPs), and other reports will be fast-tracked to allow 
for PIUs to get accustomed to the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) and other World Bank 
procedures.  
 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
64. 
The existing M&E framework from the Biyoole project will be reworked and updated. A baseline survey and an 
end-line beneficiary survey will be carried out to measure who and to what extent people benefit from the infrastructure 
as well as how it affects their lives in both social and economic terms. The M&E system will document case studies 
capturing the impact of the project on communities, considering the gender dimension, impacts on vulnerable or 
marginalized groups, and how they may ultimately contribute to stronger rural resilience. 
65. 
A web-based MIS was developed under the Biyoole project to enable real time loading of data and monitoring. 
The web-based MIS aims at providing the PIU staff and other stakeholders of the project with an indication of the project’s 
performance in terms of achievements made in the different time periods as well as the progress towards delivering the 
intended results. The PIU staff will be able to collect data, and clean and aggregate them before visualizing them