  
 
Document of 
The World Bank 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD4819  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT PAPER 
ON A  
PROPOSED ADDITIONAL GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 46.2 MILLION 
(US$62 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
AND A 
 
PROPOSED GRANT FROM THE SOMALIA MULTI-PARTNER FUND 
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$30 MILLION 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
 
FOR THE 
 
SOMALIA RECURRENT COST AND REFORM FINANCING PROJECT—PHASE III  
 
June 9, 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Governance Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
 
 
 
  
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective April 30, 2022) 
 
Currency Unit =  Somali Shillings            
US$1= SDR 0.74 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1–December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Hafez M. H. Ghanem 
Country Director: Keith E. Hansen 
Regional Director: Asad Alam 
Practice Manager: Nicola J. Smithers 
Task Team Leaders: Alma Nurshaikhova, Zubair Khurshid Bhatti 
  
 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
AF 
Additional Financing   
ASA 
Advisory Services and Analytics 
BRA 
Benadir Regional Administration   
CEC 
Citizen Engagement Center  
CIM 
Capacity Injection Mechanism 
CoA 
Chart of Accounts   
COAPM 
Comprehensive Operations, Accounting Procedures Manual   
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework  
DLI 
Disbursement-l inked Indicators   
DLR 
Disbursement-Linked Results 
DRM 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization   
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Sections  
ECF 
Extended Credit Facility   
EEP 
Eligible Expenditure Program 
EFF 
Extended Fund Facility   
ESIRT 
Environmental and Social Incident Reporting   
EU 
European Union 
FCDO 
Foreign, Commonwealth, and Development Office   
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict and Violence 
FGS 
Federal Republic of Somalia   
FHS 
Female Health Supervisors 
FHW 
Female Health Workers   
FM 
Financial Management  
FMFF 
Finance Ministers' Fiscal Forum 
FMS 
Federal Member States    
GBV 
Gender-based Violence   
GHG 
Greenhouse Gases 
GRC 
Grievance Redress Committee 
GRM 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service   
HIPC 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 
HMIS 
Health Management and Information System 
HRM 
Human Resources Management   
HTP  
Health Technical Partner   
ICT 
Information and Communications Technology 
IDA 
International Development Association   
IDP 
Internally Displaced Persons 
IFI 
International Financial Institutions 
IFR 
Interim Financial Report 
IGFF 
Inter-governmental Fiscal Forum   
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
ITAS 
Integrated Tax Administration Automation System  
IP 
Implementation Progress  
 
ISR 
Implementation Status and Results   
 
 
 
IVA 
Independent Verification Agent 
MA 
Monitoring Agent 
MDA 
Ministries, Departments, and Agencies  
MoF 
Ministry of Finance 
MoH 
Ministry of Health 
NCSC 
National Civil Service Commission 
NDCs 
Nationally Determined Contributions 
NDP9 
9th National Development Plan 
NPV 
Net Present Value     
NSRC 
Non-Salary Recurrent Costs 
OAG 
Office of the Accountant General  
OAuG 
Office of the Auditor General   
OBI 
Open Budget Index 
OHS 
Occupational Health and Safety 
PBC 
Performance-Based Condition  
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
PFM 
Public Finance Management  
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PLR 
Performance and Learning Review 
POM 
Project Operations Manual   
PP 
Procurement Plan   
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development   
PREMIS 
Public Resource Management in Somalia Project 
PSM 
Public Sector Management   
RCRF 
Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing 
SEAH 
Sexual Exploitation Abuse and/or Harassment 
SERP 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project  
SFMIS 
Somalia Financial Management Information System  
SMPF 
Somalia Multi-Partner Fund  
SSA 
Sub-Saharan Africa 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement   
T&A 
Time and Attendance 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
UCoA 
Unified Chart of Accounts   
UNJPLG 
UN Joint Program on Local Governance   
USAID 
United States Agency for International Development    
VA 
Verification Agent 
WHO 
World Health Organization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
   
I. 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING ........................................ 8 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING .................................................................... 16 
III. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 31 
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................................. 33 
V. WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS .............................................................................. 41 
VI    SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES ..................................................................................... 42 
VII   DETAILED CHANGE(S) .................................................................................................... 42 
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 48 
Annex 1. Detailed Description of the Implementation Progress by Component .................... 100 
Annex 2. Disbursement Status of RCRF II DLIs as of May 10, 2022 .......................................... 104 
Annex 3. Revised List of RCRF III Performance-Based Conditions............................................ 109 
 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase 3 (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 116 
 
       
BASIC INFORMATION – PARENT (Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase 3 - P173731) 
 
 
Country 
Product Line 
Team Leader(s) 
Somalia 
IBRD/IDA 
Alma Nurshaikhova 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Resp CC 
Req CC 
Practice Area (Lead) 
P173731 
Investment Project 
Financing 
EAEG1 (9748) 
AECE2 (6542) 
Governance 
  
Implementing Agency: Federal Member State Galmudug, Federal Member State Hirshabelle, Federal Member State 
Jubaland, Federal Member state Puntland, Federal Member State Southwest, Ministry of Finance, Federal 
Government of Somalia 
 ADD FIN TBL1 
Is this a regionally tagged 
project? 
 
No 
 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
 
No 
 
Approval Date 
Closing Date 
Expected 
Guarantee 
Expiration Date 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
11-Jun-2020 
31-Dec-2023  
Moderate 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Parent 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach [MPA] 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[✓] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase 3 (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 116 
 
Development Objective(s) 
 
To support the Federal Government of Somalia and Eligible Federal Member States to strengthen resource 
management systems, the inter-governmental fiscal framework, and service delivery systems in health and 
education. 
 
Ratings (from Parent ISR) 
 
RATING_DRAFT_NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation 
Latest ISR 
 
22-Sep-2020 
26-Apr-2021 
01-Nov-2021 
30-May-2022 
Progress towards 
achievement of PDO 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Overall Implementation 
Progress (IP) 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
Overall ESS Performance 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
Overall Risk 
H 
 
H 
 
H 
 
H 
 
Financial Management 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Project Management 
MS 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Procurement 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform 
Financing Project - Phase III - P177900) 
 
ADDFIN_TABLE 
Project ID 
Project Name 
Additional Financing Type 
Urgent Need or Capacity 
Constraints 
P177900 
Additional Financing for 
Somalia Recurrent Cost & 
Reform Financing Project - 
Phase III 
Restructuring, Scale Up 
Yes 
Financing instrument 
Product line 
Approval Date 
Investment Project 
IBRD/IDA 
23-Jun-2022 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase 3 (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 116 
 
Financing 
Projected Date of Full 
Disbursement 
Bank/IFC Collaboration   
 
 
31-Dec-2025 
No 
 
 
Is this a regionally tagged project? 
 
No 
 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Child 
 
 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[✓] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[  ] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
 
 Disbursement Summary (from Parent ISR) 
 
Source of Funds 
Net  
Commitments 
Total Disbursed 
Remaining Balance 
Disbursed 
IBRD 
 
 
 
  
 
 % 
IDA 
  68.00 
  34.81 
  33.77 
    
 
51 % 
Grants 
 
 
 
  
 
 % 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform 
Financing Project - Phase III - P177900) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
SUMMARY (Total Financing) 
 
Current Financing 
Proposed Additional 
Financing 
Total Proposed 
Financing 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase 3 (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 116 
 
Total Project Cost 
68.00 
92.00 
160.00 
Total Financing 
68.00 
92.00 
160.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
68.00 
62.00 
130.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILSNewFinEnh1- Additional Financing 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
62.00 
          IDA Grant 
62.00 
Non-World Bank Group Financing 
     Trust Funds 
30.00 
          Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
30.00 
 
   
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Guarantee Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
0.00 
  62.00 
   0.00 
  62.00 
National PBA 
0.00 
  62.00 
   0.00 
  62.00 
Total 
0.00 
62.00 
   0.00 
62.00 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
Does the project require any other Policy waiver(s)? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase 3 (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 116 
 
 
ESStandards 
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Not Currently Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Not Currently Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Not Currently Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
ESStandardsNote 
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Governance 
 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Education 
Health, Nutrition & Population 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase 3 (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 116 
 
PROJECT TEAM 
 
Bank Staff 
Name 
Role 
Specialization 
Unit 
Alma Nurshaikhova 
Team Leader (ADM 
Responsible) 
Public Sector Specialist 
EAEG1 
Zubair Khurshid Bhatti 
Team Leader 
 
EAEG1 
Francis Akolu Muthuiya 
Procurement Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Procurement 
EAERU 
Stephen Diero Amayo 
Financial Management 
Specialist (ADM Responsible) 
 
EAEG1 
Haroub Ahmed Haroub 
Environmental Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Consultant - Environmental 
Safeguards 
SAEE2 
Vanessa Sigrid Tilstone 
Social Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Social Safeguards 
SAES2 
Alyssa Louise Davis 
Team Member 
Health 
EAEG1 
Andreas Henrik Fiebelkorn 
Team Member 
Governance 
EAEG1 
Ben Okindo Ayako Miranga 
Team Member 
Environment 
SAEE2 
Bernard O. Olayo 
Team Member 
Health 
HAEH2 
Cem Dener 
Team Member 
 
EGVPA 
Eric Walter Maina 
Team Member 
 
AEMSO 
Frederick Yankey 
Team Member 
 
EAEG1 
Jean O Owino 
Team Member 
Disbursement 
WFACS 
Late Felix Lawson 
Team Member 
Disbursement 
WFACS 
Leonard Mutuku Matheka 
Team Member 
 
EAEG1 
Lucy Anyango Musira 
Team Member 
Public Sector 
EAEG1 
Martin M. Serrano 
Counsel 
Legal Counsel 
LEGAM 
Mohamud Yasin Jama 
Team Member 
 
EAEG1 
Natasha Sharma 
Team Member 
Economist 
EAEM1 
Nathalie S. Munzberg 
Safeguards Advisor/ESSA 
Safeguards 
AFWDE 
Nicola J. Smithers 
Program Manager 
Overall Guidance 
EAEG1 
Nyabicha Omurwa Onang'o Team Member 
Consultant - Financial 
Management 
EAEG1 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase 3 (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 116 
 
Ousman Abdulahi Ali 
Team Member 
Education 
HAEE2 
Pedro Cerdan-Infantes 
Team Member 
Education 
HAEE2 
Ramiro Ignacio Jauregui-
Zabalaga 
Counsel 
 
LEGAM 
Rita Obioma Itoro-Godfrey 
Team Member 
Operations 
EAEG1 
Ruth Akisa Oriama 
Team Member 
 
EAEG1 
Saad Omer Siddiqui 
Team Member 
 
EAEG1 
Sandra M Kuwaza 
Team Member 
Disbursement 
WFACS 
Sangeeta Kumari 
Social Specialist 
Social Development 
SAES2 
Verena Phipps-Ebeler 
Team Member 
Gender 
SAES2 
 
Extended Team 
Name 
Title 
Organization 
Location 
   
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 116 
 
I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
A. 
Introduction 
1. 
This Project Paper seeks the approval of the Executive Directors to provide an additional grant in the 
amount of SDR 46.2 million (US$62 million equivalent) to the Federal Republic of Somalia (FGS) for the 
Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (RCRF III)—P173731. The FGS Ministry of Finance 
requested in its letter dated October 21, 2021, this additional financing and a restructuring to extend the closing 
date of the project from December 31, 2023, to December 31, 2025. 
2. 
The additional financing (AF) responds to an urgent need, as Somalia, on top of persisting conflict, is 
facing the worst drought in decades and a surge in prices due to the war in Ukraine, which intensifies 
vulnerabilities from the COVID-19 pandemic and the locust plague. Against this backdrop, ensuring 
continuation of RCRF support is critical for delivery of essential services, such as health and education. The AF is 
also instrumental in helping Somalia remain on track with Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) completion 
point triggers1 by strengthening core government systems and increasing financing for public services, including 
strengthening domestic resource mobilization, and improving intergovernmental fiscal relations. By doing so, 
the AF also has a pivotal role in reinforcing reforms supported by the planned Somalia Inclusive Growth 
Development Policy Operation2 (DPO; P174889), the planned Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management 
Project (SERP; P177298) and the recently approved World Bank funded projects in the health and education 
sectors (Somalia Improving Health Services Project - Damal Caafimaad, P172031, and Somalia Education for 
Human Capital Project, P172434), with which it is closely aligned. 
3. 
In addition, the RCRF III project will be restructured to introduce the following changes: (i) scaling up 
selected activities and piloting new areas of support; (ii) adding new or revising existing performance-based 
conditions (PBCs) and results indicators; and (iii) extending the closing date by 24 months from December 31, 
2023 to December 31, 2025.  
4. 
The RCRF III project is part of a series of RCRF projects that first became effective in July 2015. The first 
phase of the RCRF (P148428), a one-year project, tested the systems for on-budget recurrent cost financing and 
piloted the use of the MA. RCRF Phase II (P154875) and an Additional Financing (P167224) supported the 
implementation of Somalia’s Eighth National Development Plan (2017–2020) and helped Somalia reach the HIPC 
decision point in March 2020. The RCRF III project, a US$68 million IDA grant (D658-SO), was approved by the 
World Bank on June 11, 2020, became effective on December 16, 2020, and currently has a closing date of 
December 31, 2023. This is the first additional financing to the phase 3 of the project.  
5. 
The proposed AF complies with World Bank procedures. The parent project is currently rated as 
Moderately Satisfactory for progress toward achievement of the project development objective (PDO) and 
 
1 Debt relief under the HIPC initiative after Somalia reaches the completion point, preliminarily expected in 2023, could reduce FGS 
external debt from US$5.2 billion at end-2018 to US$557 million in net present value (NPV) terms. Somalia’s progress on international 
financial institution (IFI) normalization and HIPC opened the door to new Official Development Assistance and helped pave the way for 
a three-year Extended Credit Facility (ECF) and Extended Fund Facility (EFF) program with the IMF to anchor reforms between the HIPC 
decision and completion points. 
2 The PBCs complement the reforms supported in the proposed DPO, specifically fiscal federalism agenda, enhanced harmonization of 
revenue collection processes across the FGS and the FMS, greater collaboration between the FGS and the Federal Member States (FMS), 
and wage bill management and transparency. The intergovernmental coordination platform will provide leverage for the policy and 
technical level discussions on the effective use of Bank financing.   
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 116 
 
Satisfactory for implementation progress (IP). The legal covenants are met under the parent project,3 and there 
is moderately satisfactory compliance with financial management (FM) arrangements. The World Bank has used 
a third-party monitoring agent (MA) to perform independent verification to certify eligibility of the expenditures 
upon which payments are made. The Environment and Social (E&S) performance has been Satisfactory, with 
implementation of all E&S risk mitigation measures initiated.  
B. 
Project Status 
6. 
The parent project’s PDO is to support the FGS and eligible Federal Member States (FMS) to strengthen 
resource management systems, the intergovernmental fiscal framework, and service delivery systems in 
health and education.  
7. 
RCRF II and RCRF III have realized significant achievements. First, RCRF financing enabled the continued 
presence and strengthening of the state apparatus during the critical early state formation process. It 
established predictable and accountable payment of civil servants, teachers, and female health workers’ salaries 
across the FGS and the FMS. There is a steady improvement in the timely payment of FGS salaries, with 75 
percent of eligible civil servants’ salaries paid on time in 2021, compared to 67 percent in 2019, and an average 
delay in payment of four days as of December 2021. 
8. 
RCRF has been helping to reestablish the state as a provider of basic services, notably building basic 
education and health services delivery through country systems after decades of off-system, off-budget donor 
financing of services. The female health worker (FHW) program, originally present only in the capital city 
Mogadishu and selected locations in Puntland and Galmudug, is now active in all FMS, reaching out to the most 
remote and hardest to access areas.4 The project’s support initiated the World Bank’s reengagement in the 
Somalia health sector, leading to the development of a complementary health project: the Somalia Improving 
Health Services Project—Damal Caafimaad (P172031). Further, FHWs have played a critical role in supporting 
the response to the COVID-19 pandemic in Somalia by functioning as frontline workers performing critical tasks 
that include public health education, contact tracing, and mobilizing the population to access vaccines. In the 
education sector, systems of salary payments to teachers and non-teaching education administration staff were 
established; where more than 2,662 teachers in Benadir, Jubbaland, Galmudug, Hirshabelle, and Southwest 
State were given proficiency testing; with the first round of school supervision exercises conducted in 
2019/2020, establishing a baseline. This foundational work similarly led to the approval of the Somalia Education 
for Human Capital Project (P172434).  
9. 
Third, RCRF has been the key facilitator of the fiscal federalism agenda by institutionalizing the 
Intergovernmental Fiscal Forum (IGFF) and dedicated IGFF Secretariat. The IGFF serves as a platform for 
dialogue between the FGS and the FMS and has built trust and sustained technical communications between 
governments amid increased political tensions. Transfers to eligible FMS in 2021 doubled compared to the 2018 
baseline. RCRF has also acted as key platform for the World Bank engagement in public finance management 
(PFM), domestic revenue mobilization (DRM), health, education, and civil service. Service delivery transfer 
agreements in the health sector were signed between FGS and five states in 2021, laying the foundation for 
clarifying functional assignments between FGS and the FMS. 
 
3 The parent project’s requirement for the FGS to select and engage verification consultant(s) to assist the Office of the Auditor General 
(OAuG) with the preparation of the PBC verification reports is implemented through support from the World Bank–financed Somalia 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management Capacity Strengthening Project (DRM & PFM Project).  
4 In addition to the preexisting 340 FHWs and 19 FHSs in Puntland, Galmudug, and BRA, 546 new FHWs and 39 FHSs were recruited in 
2021, with a plan to expand the number by 3,000 in 2025. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 116 
 
10. 
One of the biggest program milestones has been the move from paper-based traditional data gathering 
to completely digital data collection and instant submission with the help of smartphones. Digital intervention 
has not only brought in significant optimization and cost savings throughout the process but it has also 
empowered performance-monitoring methods used by program field personnel. Since early 2022, the use of 
smartphones by female health workers enabled daily activity monitoring, tagged with location and time of 
service delivery, while call center agents have been contacting beneficiaries and checking on the quality of 
services received, thus helping to inform managers on the state of play in remote areas.  
11. 
Last, RCRF has advanced key administrative and policy reforms through performance-based conditions 
(PBCs).5 Transparency of payment processes for operational expenditures has been considerably increased by 
moving from cash advance practices to making all government payments for salaries, transfers, and capital 
expenditures directly to staff and vendor bank accounts.6 FGS adopted a customs modernization road map and 
has made considerable progress in automating customs and inland revenue administration. Cash management 
and forecasting practices have improved with automatic reconciliation of cash balances in the Somalia Financial 
Management Information System (SFMIS). FGS and the FMS reached an agreement on a harmonized chart of 
accounts (CoA) and standardized fiscal reporting. The Somalia’s National Civil Service Commission (NCSC) 
published its first annual status report on women in senior leadership positions and prepared an action plan on 
promoting empowerment of women in the civil service.7  
12. 
Progress against all components has been Satisfactory. Component 1 has been satisfactory with 
substantial progress in timely and accurate payment of salaries through an automated payroll system. The 
remaining weaknesses include maintenance and archiving of staff personnel files and weak management of 
time and attendance. Progress on Component 2 has been moderately satisfactory with the convening of high-
level political and technical meetings, harmonization of the Chart of Accounts, and agreements on FGS fiscal 
transfer formula options at the technical level. However, the adoption of the formula at political level is still 
pending, partially due to delayed presidential elections and the expectations of the new government. 
Implementation of FMS level PBCs has also been delayed. Progress on Component 3 has been upgraded to 
satisfactory in the recent Implementation Status and Results report to reflect good progress in activities 
supporting improved health and education service delivery. Intensified efforts are required in the coming 
months to fully roll out the FHW program and increase uptake of digital data submission and analysis. Finally, 
progress on Component 4 is satisfactory, but continuous efforts are needed to institutionalize citizen 
engagement instruments. PDO and intermediate results indicators are on track.  
13. 
Despite significant project achievements, challenges remain in the payroll process, reforms 
implementation, and institutional capacities. These are presented in more detail in the following section. 
Annex 1 provides a detailed description of the implementation progress by component.  
C. 
Rationale for Additional Financing and Restructuring  
14. 
Somalia is a conflict-affected fragile state on a path of state building, political stabilization, and 
reconstruction. For over two decades, Somalia has experienced protracted conflict and fragility resulting in the 
disintegration of public sector institutions and basic public services and the erosion of public trust in 
government. The breakthrough 2012 Provisional Constitution established a federal political structure, including 
a Parliament, the FGS, and FMS. Somalia also successfully undertook two peaceful electoral processes at the 
 
5 RCRF III is and Investment Project Financing (IPF) with PBCs, while RCRF II is an IPF with disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs). 
6 Cash advances to MDAs (ministries, departments, and agencies) for non-salary recurrent costs dropped from 56.4 percent in 2018 to 
about 4 percent in 2021 and included only such exceptions as petty cash, travel advances, security sector, and contingency 
7 Details on the status of RCRF II reform benchmarks is provided in Annex 2.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 116 
 
federal level—in late 2012 and early 2017. Despite a long delayed and turbulent process, on May 15, 2022, a 
new president of Somalia was elected. The newly emerged institutions are still weak, contested, and the 
patterns of fragility are likely to continue. The militia-based opposition, known as Al-Shabaab, retains the ability 
to conduct large scale attacks, including in Mogadishu.   
15. 
Somalia is one of the poorest countries in the world, with a per capita GDP of US$314. It is estimated 
that 68.6 percent of the population live below the poverty line,8 and another 10 percent live close to the poverty 
line. Years of conflict, instability, and violence have led to extremely low investments in human capital formation 
and have left several generations of Somalis unable to achieve their potential. Somalia’s health indicators 
remain among the worst in the world, with an average life expectancy of 58 years as of 2020.9 Due to a 
combination of health service supply and demand challenges, only 32 percent of births are attended by skilled 
personnel and only 21 percent of births occur in health facilities nationwide.10 The education system is still 
evolving and continues to be highly fragmented, leading to weak sector outcomes. Access to education has 
remained low over the last two decades, with large variations; the most disadvantaged, specifically girls and 
those living in rural areas and poor households, remain excluded from schooling opportunities.   
16. 
Somalia is in urgent need of assistance due to the recent worsening drought crisis, increases food 
insecurity and surge in prices caused by the war in Ukraine, and continued vulnerabilities from the COVID-19 
pandemic. Somalia is one of the most severely drought-affected country in the Horn of Africa with most parts 
of the country experiencing severe drought conditions as of May 2022. The ongoing severe drought is affecting 
Somalia’s economic recovery by reducing the country’s limited domestic agricultural production, including 
livestock - the country’s primary source of export earnings. The COVID-19 pandemic is having significant indirect 
effects on security, driven by the regional economic downturn and supply chain disruptions. Furthermore, 
commodity prices increase, particularly for wheat and fuel because of the war in Ukraine is placing strains on 
household expenditures, especially for the poor.  
17. 
Somalia’s capacity to respond to these challenges is limited. Fiscal space continues to be low, as FGS 
expenditures continue to outstrip increasing revenues. Sustaining a positive trajectory in the face of numerous 
challenges—weak government capacity, asymmetric federal structures, security concerns, human capital 
deficits, widespread poverty, low levels of state legitimacy, and continued violence—requires predictable 
financing, improved institutions, clear fiscal federalism framework, and enhanced citizen engagement, among 
other political and security factors. Continued service delivery in health and education with the focus on the 
most deprived and remote rural areas is crucial. 
18. 
Over the medium- to long-term, the FGS, and especially the FMS, will continue to require support in 
financing recurrent costs for uninterrupted service delivery. More than half of FGS total expenditures goes 
toward the public wage bill, an expenditure pattern like that of other Fragility, Conflict and Violence (FCV) 
countries.11 The FGS wage bill as a share of total spending was at record highs of 61 percent in 2021. Wages 
include security sector salaries and allowances, the largest expenditure item; payments against formal non-
security sector salaries and allowances (recruitments done through the civil service commission); and non-
formal salaries and allowances (Figure 1). Formalized civil service payroll, comprising 29 percent of the non-
security wage bill, has been steady at around US$35 million of annual financing.  
 
8 US$1.90 a day in purchasing power parity terms for 2017, the latest data available (https://data.worldbank.org/). 
9 World Development Indicators (https://data.worldbank.org/) 
10 Somalia Health and Demographic Survey, 2020; skilled personnel include nurses, midwives, auxiliary midwives, clinical officers, and 
doctors. 
11 World Bank (2020), “Public Wage Bill Management: Trends and Way Forward,” Public Expenditure Review. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 116 
 
Figure 1. FGS wage bill trends, 2014-2021, US$12 
 
Source: Somalia Accountant General and the Monitoring Agent. 
 
19. 
Domestic revenues have been increasing, but not at a pace sufficient to finance growing public 
expenditures. Starting from a very low baseline, the federal government has been rapidly increasing its 
domestic revenue collection from 1.7 percent of GDP in 2013 to a projected 4.4 percent of GDP in 2021. 
Domestic revenue (taxes, fees, and customs) financed 49 percent of total budget expenditures in 2021, while 
the remaining 54 percent was financed from external grants. According to World Bank and International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) estimates, domestic revenue collection will continue to grow in the coming years but will 
not reach a sustainable fiscal space (Figure 2).  
 
Figure 2. FGS revenue and expenditure trends, 2016-2024, US$ million  
 
Source: Somalia FGS Ministry of Finance (https://mof.gov.so/fiscal/); World Bank and IMF forecasts (April 2022) from 
Somalia Inclusive Growth DPO series (P174889) Program Document. 
 
20. 
To help the government provide key non-security services, RCRF has been financing the formalized non-
security sector wage bill in the FGS and the FMS using two types of financing. The first is paid up front (referred 
to as “baseline” financing) and comprises 20 percent of formalized civil service. The second is performance 
based for earmarked expenditures (following the achievement of PBCs). Both types supported under RCRF are 
on a declining scale (Figure 3), except in 2021, when a larger package of performance benchmarks was 
 
12 “Baseline” financing refers to an input-based financing of non-security sector civil service salaries through the advance-replenishment 
model. 
 -
 50,000,000
 100,000,000
 150,000,000
 200,000,000
 250,000,000
 300,000,000
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
 Total wage bill incl security
 Total non-security wage bill (Object 21)
 Gross payroll - formalized civil service
 Baseline RCRF financing of civil service
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022f
2023f
2024f
Taxes, Fees & Customs
Grants
Total expenditure
Wages
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 116 
 
introduced to incentivize additional reform efforts on wage bill fiscal sustainability in response to increased 
fiscal pressures, while staying on track with the IMF Extended Credit Facility (ECF). By providing this critical fiscal 
cushion to the government in these early years of state building, RCRF has been an important instrument 
supporting a credible and sustainable payroll and establishing the foundation for efficient budget execution and 
payment systems for the non-security sectors. 
 
Figure 3. RCRF financing of non-security sector formalized civil service wage bill (FGS and FMS), 2014-2021 
a. Share of RCRF baseline financing of civil service  
b. Share of RCRF baseline & reforms financing of 
civil service  
 
Source: World Bank (2021), Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing–Phase 2 (P154875); Restructuring Paper (Report No: 
RES45609). 
 
21. 
The FGS, and especially the FMS, continue to rely on RCRF support for recurrent cost financing. While 
the declining scale of recurrent cost financing may continue to be pursued at the FGS level, FMS are still highly 
dependent on RCRF. Salary costs financed by RCRF account for almost 100 percent of salaries for formalized civil 
servants in Jubaland, Galmudug, Hirshabelle, and Southwest States of Somalia.  
22. 
Further strengthening revenue and expenditure management remains critical. Somalia has progressed 
in building a foundation for PFM, DRM, and core public sector management (PSM)13 reforms in a short time 
through the support of the RCRF series, the Domestic Revenue Mobilization and Public Financial Management 
Capacity Strengthening Project (P151492), and the Capacity Injection Project (P149971). However, the 
challenges expected in Somalia to strengthen PFM, DRM, and PSM remain significant. While budget preparation 
and execution processes have improved, there is still significant variance between the original budget and the 
actual expenditures in all Somali governments, undermining budget credibility. Low expenditure outturns are 
primarily the result of low revenue outturns. Insufficient government capacity to develop revenue forecasts 
results in unrealistic fiscal frameworks, which in turn lead to budget cuts. Deficient time and attendance 
management by civil servants on both formal and non-formal payrolls cause payroll leakages. Furthermore, the 
mounting trend of non-formalized payroll and allowances undermines fiscal sustainability. 
23. 
RCRF has incentivized PFM, DRM, and PSM reforms through performance benchmarks and will need to 
continue doing so in the next few years. Extending RCRF support will be important to continue generating 
synergies between the World Bank supported projects and incentivizing the implementation of policy reforms 
 
13 Key achievements include (i) enacting modernized PFM laws; (ii) deploying financial management information systems for payment 
processes and reporting; (iii) establishing basic fiscal reporting and operational capabilities to manage inter-governmental fiscal transfers; 
(iv) doubling revenue collection to US$225 million (2021) from US$114 million (2015); and (v) increasing civil service capacities. 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
 Government financing of civil service
 Baseline RCRF financing of civil service
0%
50%
100%
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
 Government financing of civil service
 Performance benchmarks
 Baseline RCRF financing of civil service
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 116 
 
supported by SERP through RCRF performance benchmarks. The feasibility of leveraging PBCs for the FMS has 
increased. However, the main challenges to realizing PBC financing for FMS payrolls are liquidity constraints, 
fiscal risks, and cash management, and therefore, a more cautious and gradual approach will be applied to test 
the performance-based financing systems at FMS.  
24. 
The fiscal federalism framework requires further reinforcement for longer-term resilience and fiscal 
sustainability. The Provisional Constitution does not provide for a division of resources, nor does it define 
functional assignments. The intergovernmental fiscal federalism forum and sectoral platforms established with 
the support of RCRF aim to fill those gaps. While basic fiscal reporting and operational capabilities to manage 
intergovernmental fiscal transfers have been established, improving weak coordination between FGS and the 
FMS and implementing a predictable grant allocation formula to the FMS becomes particularly urgent, since 
FGS transfers are growing annually and faster compared to other revenues.   
25. 
The World Bank’s support to Somalia’s fiscal federalism agenda has initially focused on a two-tier 
system of intergovernmental relations between FGS and the FMS. Information about local governance 
structures and demographics of districts, especially outside FMS capital cities, is scant and contested. The World 
Bank has started engaging with the third tier through the Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II.14 The need 
is emerging to systematize knowledge on sub-FMS decentralization and localization reform efforts and, in 
partnership with key stakeholders, to support building systems for political oversight and management of last-
mile service delivery.  
26. 
The proposed AF will continue to address gender gaps that exist in public sector recruitment, education 
and health service delivery. In the FGS, women make up only 26 percent of the total formalized civil service 
workforce and only 19 percent of the two highest grade levels.15 In RCRF supported schools, only 18 percent of 
teachers were female in 2021 compared to the rate of 33 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa in 2019 (the latest 
available data).16 The percentage of women in Somalia receiving prenatal care was 31 percent in 2019, which 
was much lower compared to the latest available data on the average for Sub-Saharan Africa (82 percent in 
2017).17 A 2021 National Civil Service Commission report identified the following barriers to female 
employment: (i) lack of a gender equity employment law; (ii) cultural barriers; (iii) clan and political barriers; (iv) 
skills and knowledge gaps; (v) non-meritocratic promotions; and (vi) lack of female role models in senior public 
service positions.18  
27. 
Continued support to system building in health and education services, combined with citizen 
engagement activities, is required. AF is critical for continued support to system building efforts in the health 
and education sectors in close alignment with recently approved World Bank operations. These include the 
Somalia Improving Healthcare Services (“Damal Caafimaad”) Project (P172031),19 the Somalia Education for 
Human Capital Project (P172434),20 and the planned Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills 
 
14 Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (P170922). 
15 Somalia National Civil Service Commission (2021), Report on Women Promotion Covering the Benchmark and the Entire Progress 
Achieved as per The NCSC Gender-Related Guidelines (https://ncsc.org.so/reports) 
16 World Development Indicators (https://data.worldbank.org/) 
17 World Development Indicators (https://data.worldbank.org/) 
18 Somalia National Civil Service Commission (2021), Report on Women Promotion Covering the Benchmark and the Entire Progress 
Achieved as per The NCSC Gender-Related Guidelines (https://ncsc.org.so/reports) 
19 The Improving Healthcare Services in Somalia (“Damal Caafimaad”) Project (P172031) assists Somalia in improving coverage of 
essential health and nutrition services in project areas and in strengthening the stewardship capacity of FMS ministries of health. 
20 The objective of the Somalia Education for Human Capital Project (P172434) is to increase access to primary education in underserved 
areas, with a focus on girls, and to improve quality of instruction. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 116 
 
Project (P176898).21 The health and education interventions will require more time to mainstream into the 
government’s service delivery systems, including payment of salaries. AF financing will therefore provide a 
bridge for the transition, which will start with the implementation of the Damal Caafimaad (P172031) and 
Education (P172434) projects. 
28. 
State legitimacy vis-à-vis Somalia’s citizens remains low. Currently, the social contract between the 
authorities and the population in Somalia is thin and largely exclusionary, which can be largely explained by a 
weak state-citizen bargaining dynamic characterized by very poor state capacity.22 Improving public trust in state 
institutions is essential to avoid getting trapped in a low-trust, non-cooperative social equilibrium, or even a 
possible revival of conflict. 23   
29. 
In addition to being critical for Somalia’s positive HIPC trajectory, DPO, SERP and other World Bank 
supported operations, the proposed AF aligns with and is tailored to achieve the strategic goals set out in 
Somalia’s Ninth National Development Plan (NDP9) (2020–2024), the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 
FY19-22 (Report No. 124734-SO) discussed by the Board on August 29, 2018.24  Somalia’s NDP9 outlines the 
country’s priorities for programs to reduce poverty and boost inclusive growth.25 The plan aims to strengthen 
governance, promote human development, boost economic recovery, establish peace and security, and make 
politics more inclusive. The plan’s ambitious agenda requires substantial financial resources, sound financial 
management systems, improved intergovernmental coordination between FGS and the FMS, and a more 
responsive citizen-centric state. The AF will be a key contributor to the First Focus Area of the CPF and the 
Performance and Learning Review for 2019–2021, i.e., “Strengthening Institutions to Deliver Services,” and its 
objectives to (i) improve PFM and institutional effectiveness; (ii) enhance resource sharing; and (iii) improve 
service delivery systems for more inclusive social services, especially of health and education.  
30. 
The RCRF will continue to coordinate with other donors and implementing agencies in Somalia, 
including the United Kingdom Foreign, Commonwealth, and Development Office (FCDO) financed Public 
Resource Management in Somalia (PREMIS) project, IMF, European Union (EU) Budget support, and the 
United Nations Joint Program on Local Governance (UNJPLG) program, among others. PREMIS technical 
assistance helped ensure that Hirshabelle, Galmudug, Jubaland and South-West states meet RCRF eligibility 
criteria and supported intergovernmental dialogue, such as the fiscal reporting requirement, harmonization of 
the CoA, and support recruitment of civil servants funded through the RCRF. Since the AF looks to support local 
government as part of the fiscal federalism agenda, it will closely engage with partners working at the local 
government level, such as the UNJPLG.  
31. 
The AF will include climate considerations aimed at reducing Somalia’s vulnerabilities to climate-
induced threats.26 Climate plays a key role in Somalia’s economy and livelihoods as its economy is dominated 
 
21 The Somalia Empowering Women through Education and Skills project (P176898) will enhance female literacy and numeracy and 
improve the skills of girls and women in leadership and income generation.    
22 World Bank (2021), Understanding Somalia’s Social Contract and State-Building Efforts: Consequences for Donor Interventions 
(Washington, DC: World Bank).   
23 World Bank (2021), “Reflections on the Future Role of the State in Somalia from the Perspective of Aid Effectiveness,” Development 
Policy Review 10.1111/dpr.12549. 
24 The Somalia Performance Learning Review 2022 for CPF FY19-22 (P173465) extends the CPF one year through FY23 and adjusts the 
CPF framework to account for scaled IDA assistance, enhances support for institution-building and service delivery critical to 
strengthening the social contract, and supports a green, resilient, and inclusive recovery from the triple crisis of COVID-19, 
floods/drought, and impact of Ukraine war, including through a deeper focus on human capital and foundational infrastructure. 
25 Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Development (2019), Somalia National Development Plan 2020-2024 
(http://mop.gov.so/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/NDP-9-2020-2024.pdf)  
26 For the detailed description of proposed activities, see paragraph 66.   
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 116 
 
by agricultural activities, which in 2017 accounted for about 65 percent of GDP and employment.27 Somalia has 
recurrently suffered from several natural hazards, including drought, floods, cyclones, and climate-related 
diseases and epidemics, which have disrupted learning in schools, damaged infrastructure, destroyed farmland, 
and displaced thousands of people.28 As of May 2022, about 6.1 million Somalis are affected by extreme drought 
conditions, of whom 771,400 have been displaced from their homes in search of water, food, and pasture.29 
Hunger is rising, with 4.1 million people projected to face severe or near complete food shortages through mid-
2022 and up to 80 per cent of the water sources across the country are drying up.30 In terms of health effects, 
the World Health Organization (WHO) reported over 17,000 cholera cases and 388 deaths from the beginning 
of 2017 to the end of March 2022 across Somalia, making it a grade 2 emergency situation. Because of climate 
change, Somalia will also be increasingly at risk of vector- and water-borne diseases.31  
32. 
Although not internationally recognized, Somaliland declared independence in 1991, does not 
participate in the federal system and has therefore also not been part of the RCRF series. While the 
engagement for development work has been different in Somaliland from the beginning, it does not exclude 
the potential inclusion of Somaliland in future RCRF phases. 
 
II. DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
A. 
Overall Approach  
33. 
The PDO of the project remains unchanged: “to support the Federal Government of Somalia and Eligible 
Federal Member States to strengthen resource management systems, the intergovernmental fiscal framework, 
and service delivery systems in health and education.” 
34. 
The parent project’s theory of change remains the same. The following five components established 
under the parent project remain unchanged: (i) recurrent cost finance to reform resource management systems; 
(ii) strengthen intergovernmental fiscal relations; (iii) transfers for core government functions and foundational 
education and health service delivery mechanisms in eligible FMS; (iv) citizen engagement and feedback; and 
(v) project management. Timely and predictable input-based financing of the FGS and FMS civil service wage bill 
will support core government functions for enhanced state legitimacy. Performance-based financing will 
incentivize reforms in key resource management systems for greater fiscal sustainability, accountability, and 
transparency of public expenditures. Support for a more predictable, rule-based intergovernmental transfers 
system will further enhance institution building at the FMS level and build trust between the FGS and FMS. 
Similarly, financing the education and health ministries’ wage bill, including the salaries of teachers and health 
workers, along with system strengthening activities, will contribute to the institutionalization of on-budget 
government-led service delivery and to increased citizen perceptions of the government as a key service 
provider. Finally, budget transparency and citizen engagement activities will further increase the transparency 
 
27 World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Climate Change Overview. Country summary: Somalia 
(https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/Somalia) 
28 UNOCHA (United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs) (2021), Somalia Humanitarian Bulletin Available at: 
https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/somalia-humanitarian-bulletin-april-2021  
29 UNOCHA (2022), Somalia: Drought Situation Report No.7, 20 May 2022 (https://www.unocha.org/media-centre/humanitarian-
reports) 
30 UNOCHA (2022), Somalia: Drought Situation Report No.6 (As of 20 April 2022). Available at: https://www.unocha.org/media-
centre/humanitarian-reports.  
31 World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal. Climate Change Overview. Country summary: Somalia 
(https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/Somalia) 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 116 
 
and accountability of public expenditures as well as incentivize improvements in the quality of health and 
education services (Table 1). The change in scope of PBCs will further reinforce the achievement of PDO by 
introducing additional benchmarks to strengthen resource management, intergovernmental fiscal framework, 
and service delivery. The World Bank FCV strategy suggests longer-term engagement for better results. The FCV 
strategy also suggests the importance of humility. The project does not claim that these activities will in 
themselves be sufficient for political and institutional stability in Somalia, but they are necessary to provide the 
time and resources needed to enable local political evolution toward stability.  
Table 1. Results Chain and Theory of Change 
Interventions 
Intermediate (short-medium term ) Outcomes 
Long-term Outcomes 
PDO 
1. Recurrent cost finance to reform resource management systems 
Strengthened resource management systems, intergovernmental fiscal framework, and service delivery systems in 
health and education. 
Financing eligible civil 
service salaries in FGS: 
baseline  
Financing of FGS non-security formalized civil servants’ salaries 
on a declining scale 
Strengthened FGS resource management system 
through:  
• increased government financing and timely 
payment of FGS civil servants; 
• strengthened domestic revenue administration; 
• strengthened payment process for operational 
expenditures and payroll; 
• increased transparency of the wage bill 
management 
Improvements in payroll processes  
Financing eligible civil 
service salaries in FGS: 
reform benchmarks 
Integrated tax administration automation system (ITAS) and 
Somalia Customs Automation System implemented in 
Mogadishu, Bosaso and Kismayo; Comprehensive procedures 
for planning and budgeting; internal controls; and accounting 
procedures are implemented; Details of the non-formal, non-
security wage bill are published. 
2. Strengthen intergovernmental fiscal relations 
Supporting IGFF and 
Secretariat 
IGFF meets regularly; its desicions are founded on a strong 
analytical base 
Strengthened intergovernmental fiscal framework 
through increased: 
• transfers to FMS based on a rule-based formula; 
• resources for FMS ministries of health and 
education for frontline services; 
• number of FMS signing Functional Assignment  
Agreements with FGS in health and education; 
• capacities in resource management at the local 
government level 
PBCs for improved 
governance and service 
delivery at FMS level 
Budgetary appropriations for community health and education 
service delivery are approved annually  
Strengthening resource 
management systems 
Consolidated fiscal reports using the unified CoA published by 
the Ministry of Finance (MoF) monthly 
Strengthening local 
governance 
Increased number of districts that are part of intra-state fiscal 
dialogue 
3. Transfers for core government functions and foundational education and health service delivery mechanisms in eligible FMS 
Financing core 
government functions 
Staffing of key roles in ministries of finance, education and 
health in FMS 
Strengthened FMS education and community 
health services through increased: 
• number of schools that are supervised annually 
using digital tools, including self-assessment; 
• FHWs actively providing services and reporting 
on their daily activities using digital tools 
Financing education 
service delivery 
Increased share of teachers reporting timely payment of salaries 
Financing health service 
delivery  
Community health service delivery plan funds executed in a 
timely manner 
4. Citizen engagement and feedback 
Deepening and widening 
the existing budget 
transparency efforts 
Improved rating on budget transparency and public 
participation under the Open Budget Index (OBI) 
Improved budget transparency through public 
participation in the budget process 
Citizen feedback and 
corrective measures at 
local level  
Increased number of unique beneficiaries reached out to 
through the centrally contracted ICT-based engagement 
platform 
Government actions taken and reported in response to the 
feedback received  
Enhanced citizen engagement for improvement of 
health and education services 
35. 
The theory of change aligns with a social contract framework with the objective of bolstering 
thickness,32 inclusiveness, and openness in social outcomes and of aligning expectations and outcomes. 
Following recommendations of the World Bank Social Contract Advisory Services and Analytics, the AF will 
 
32 Thickness refers to the quantity of public goods and services provided by the state. See World Bank (2021) Understanding Somalia’s 
Social Contract and State-Building Efforts: Consequences and Donor Interventions   
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 116 
 
intensify efforts to build the state’s capacity to deliver community health and education services and to localize 
development by linking activities at the national, federal, and local levels. Several citizen engagement modalities 
tested by RCRF III will be continued to support efforts to build trust in government and to engage local 
communities for feedback to improve service delivery.   
36. 
The restructured design of the proposed AF is informed by the implementation of lessons of the parent 
project and similar World Bank projects implemented in FCV context. Box 1 outlines the key lessons learned 
that will be critical for sustaining and increasing the development impacts of RCRF.  
Box 1: Lessons Learned from RCRF and World Bank projects implemented in FCV countries  
What worked and should be continued  
a) Payroll Financing 
▪ The use of an independent monitoring agent plays a critical role in fiduciary oversight of salary payments. 
▪ Ex-ante clear eligibility criteria paved the way for strengthening PFM and Human Resource practices in FMS, mitigating 
severe pressures for informal practices. 
b) Reform Financing 
▪ Performance incentives elevate policy dialogue on key reforms within the government and reinforce the government’s 
commitment.  
▪ Coordination and a joined-up approach with World Bank governance projects and other developments partners 
enabled concerted efforts by the FGS. 
c) Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations 
▪ Participation eligibility criteria has been successfully used for reforms at the FMS level.  
▪ Providing support to FMS through budget appropriations of fiscal transfers stimulated the growth of intergovernmental 
fiscal transfers. Support to technical dialogue between the FGS and FMS advanced the fiscal federalism agenda. 
d) Service Delivery in Health and Education 
▪ Moving toward outcome-oriented health and education activities, notably the design of the FHW program, rather than 
purely input-focused activities, improves quality of services. 
▪ Implementation of ICT-based training, data collection, and beneficiary engagement systems have increased efficiency 
and outreach to remote areas. 
e) Citizen Engagement  
▪ The government-owned and -led citizen engagement center (Call Center) has great potential to encourage behavior 
change related to health, education, and FM outputs/outcomes; to rebuild trust through basic engagement by the state 
and accurate, objective information sharing; and to promote dialogue by strengthening existing and creating new cost-
efficient two-way communication channels between the state and society.   
 
Rethinking the pace and mode of reform  
▪ The baselines of the provision of FMS’ services are so low that while revenues may increase manifold, the expenditure 
is likely to also grow fast. Therefore, it is not likely that Somalia will reach the point when it is able to finance its recurrent 
costs from its domestic revenue in near future.  
▪ The friction and lack of trust among the federate governments absorb significant time and effort. While such delays 
frustrate the desired pace of progress, the intergovernmental dialogue and consensus building is key for the reform 
progress.   
▪ Absorption capacity must be considered when designing the reform program. Iterative adaptation is key. 
▪ Launching new initiatives (such as performance-based school grants program) through PBC financing without project 
allocations to support design, piloting, and expansion have proved challenging. 
▪ Time and attendance management require strengthening by, among other efforts, setting up biometric systems and 
linking them to the SFMIS payroll module at FGS line ministries and a blend of citizen engagement and basic 
smartphone-based reporting for last-mile service delivery.  
▪ Monitoring the non-formal wage bill is required to manage fiscal pressures. The progress has been minimal, partly due 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 116 
 
to the heterogeneity of non-formal wage bill cadres and multiple stakeholders involved in the decision-making progress. 
A step-by-step approach is needed that starts from wage bill transparency requirements.     
▪ The quality and timeliness of PBCs’ verification work requires attention.33 
▪ RCRF III performance-based conditions for FMS function as important incentive mechanisms to cascade good public FM 
practices and increased financing of social sectors, but more effort is required to increase capacities to implement 
reforms and establish stronger accountability measures for the use of PBC-based financing.  
▪ Proactive, targeted government-to-citizen engagement requires strong ownership, and therefore longer 
implementation time, by FMS and concerned MDAs. 
▪ Implementation of environment and social framework requires intensive capacity building. Given the nature of RCRF 
financed activities that span across almost all non-security MDAs at the FGS and FMS level, there are opportunities for 
integrating ESF features in respective governmental regulations and service delivery practices.  
 
 
37. 
The AF design considers the political context, reforms’ absorption capacity, a turbulent environment, 
and a medium- to long-term fiscal outlook. Specifically, it allows greater flexibility of interventions, a balanced 
mix of ambitious and more realistic reforms benchmarks, greater engagement at the FMS level, and the potential 
to sequence investments at the sub-FMS levels. The proposed PBCs and verification protocols are currently 
adequate. Activities and PBCs will be reviewed regularly as part of the RCRF mid-year and annual review 
meetings, and if needed, changes may be made to the PBC verification protocols in the Project Operations 
Manual (POM) and potentially also to the PBCs through project restructuring, while the use of independent 
verification and monitoring agents will continue (Box 2). The AF will also continue providing a platform for piloting 
new initiatives that generate lessons learned on workable solutions that may inform existing or future operations 
in Somalia and other FCV countries. At the same time, a cross-cutting objective will be to institutionalize reform 
initiatives and knowledge transfer.  
 
Box 2: The role of the Monitoring Agent and Independent Verification Agent 
 
The World Bank has used a third-party monitoring agent for previous RCRFs to perform independent verification to 
certify eligibility of the expenditures upon which payments are made. The use of an independent monitoring agent has 
played a critical role in fiduciary oversight of salary payments and tracking developments in PFM systems. Sharing MA 
reports and findings with Government to improve policy dialogue and to build a strong feedback loop on emerging risks 
and mitigation measures will continue to be fostered. 
 
The Office of the Auditor General (OAuG) undertakes verification of the RCRF PBCs at FGS and the FMS with technical 
assistance by an audit consultancy firm thereby providing a line of reporting on PBCs verification to the World Bank and 
further strengthening fiduciary risk management. 
 
B. 
Proposed Changes by Component 
38. 
Key changes are summarized in the table 2 followed by the detailed description of changes by 
component. 
 
 
 
33The verification of PBCs by an independent verification agent (IVA) has previously taken from two to four months, delaying 
reimbursement of salary payments and therefore creating liquidity constraints.      
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 116 
 
Table 2. Overview of the RCRFIII AF (US$ million) 
 
 
Key changes 
RCRF III 
AF 
Total 
Component 1: Recurrent cost finance to reform resource management systems 
13.55 
27.65 
41.2 
1.1 Financing eligible civil service 
salaries in FGS: Baseline 
Continue financing baseline civil service salaries on a declining 
scale   
7.3 
12.4 
19.7 
1.2 Financing eligible civil service 
salaries in FGS: Reform 
benchmarks (PBCs) 
New benchmarks in the areas of domestic revenue 
administration (PBCs 1.3-1.5); payment processes (PBCs 2.2, 
2.4, 2.5); intergovernmental fiscal framework (PBCs 3.1, 3.3); 
public administration (PBCs 5.2, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7); wage bill 
management (PBCs 6.1-6.6) 
6.25 
15.25 
21.5 
Component 2: Strengthen intergovernmental fiscal relations 
17.7 
9.7 
27.4 
2.1 Supporting intergovernmental 
forums and Secretariat  
Continue financing the inter-governmental dialogue on fiscal 
federalism and functional assignments in health and education  
1.4 
1.4 
2.8 
2.2 Reform benchmarks for 
improved governance and service 
delivery at FMS-level (PBCs)  
Service delivery PBCs are revised to merge two health service 
delivery PBCs and exclude performance-based school grants. 
New PBC on strengthening PFM/DRM in FMS added.   
11.7 
5.1 
16.8 
2.3 Strengthening resource 
management systems  
Revised to align with SERP 
4.6 
1.5 
6.1 
2.4 Local governance  
New sub-component to support local governance initiatives  
0 
1.7 
1.7 
Component 3: Transfers for core government functions and foundational education and health 
service delivery mechanisms in eligible FMS 
31 
46.3 
77.3 
3.1 Financing core government 
functions  
Continue financing baseline civil service salaries at a similar 
level as RCRF III  
10.8 
19.8 
30.6 
3.2 Financing education service 
delivery  
Revised to align with Education for Human Capital project and 
SERP; performance-based school grants dropped 
10.1 
9.4 
19.5 
3.3 Financing health service 
delivery  
Scale up of FHW program, aligning with Damal Caafimaad 
10.1 
17.1 
27.2 
Component 4: Citizen engagement and feedback  
2.5 
1.6 
4.1 
4.1 Budget transparency efforts 
Scale-up of activities 
0.7 
0.5 
1.2 
4.2 Support mapping, citizen 
feedback, and corrective measures 
at the local Level 
Scale-up of activities 
1.1 
0.9 
2.0 
4.3 Impact evaluation to citizen 
feedback in education and health 
Scale-up of activities 
0.7 
0.2 
0.9 
Component 5: Project management 
3.68 
6.75 
10.43 
5.1 FGS project management costs  Continue activities beyond June 2023 
2.1 
3.55 
5.65 
5.2 FMS project management 
costs  
Continue activities beyond June 2023 
1.3 
2.3 
3.6 
5.3 Independent verification agent 
(IVA) support for PBCs 
IVA to be contracted through AF.  
0.28 
0.9 
1.18 
Total 
 
68 
92 
160 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 116 
 
Component 1: Recurrent cost finance to reform resource management systems  
39. 
This component will continue to finance the civil service wage bill through input-based or “baseline” 
financing and PBCs   
Subcomponent 1.1. Financing eligible civil service salaries in FGS: Baseline  
40. 
The AF will provide, on a declining basis, input-based financing of the FGS non-security sector civil 
service wage up to December 2025. AF target will be to decrease the RCRF share of financing FGS civil service 
wage bill through the advance-replenishment model from the current 20 percent to 10 percent by 2025. In 
parallel, the focus will be on responding to the weaknesses in the RCRF-supported payrolls, such as input 
controls, inconsistent digitization, weak adjustments, and exceptions handling, as well as broader issues with 
Human Resource Management (HRM) and accountability, including time and attendance.  
41. 
Financing of the FGS Capacity Injection Mechanism (CIM) recruits will not be continued under the AF in 
line with the initial plan of graduating CIM recruits under the Capacity Injection Project (P149971), which 
closes on December 31, 2022. Starting January 2022, CIM salaries are fully sourced from the FGS own revenue, 
except for the External Assistance Fiduciary Sections (EAFS) staff salaries that will continue to be sourced from 
the parent project’s Subcomponent 1.1 until December 2022. FGS has agreed that CIM staff will no longer be 
‘branded’ as such, their salaries will be planned as part of the government’s standard salary allocations for all 
civil servants, and there will be no future replacement of vacancies left by CIM staff.  
Subcomponent 1.2. Financing eligible civil service salaries in FGS: Reform benchmarks (PBCs) 
42. 
The AF aims to expand the scope of PBCs and increase financing from up to US$6.3 million to US$21.5 
million through reimbursement against eligible expenditures. The revised set of PBCs will center on six key 
areas:  
PBC 1. Strengthen domestic revenue administration: The PBC title is revised from “strengthening customs 
administration” to “strengthening domestic revenue administration” to reflect the inclusion of reforms on 
inland revenue management. In addition to two original benchmarks on customs administration, three 
new benchmarks are added on the procurement of a vendor to develop and implement an Integrated Tax 
Administration System (ITAS), the harmonization of Tax Identification Number (TIN), and ITAS 
implementation. The implementation of PBC 1 will be supported by FCDO and SERP. 
PBC 2. Strengthen the payment process for operational expenditures and payroll.  The PBC title is revised 
to include improvements in payroll management. A new benchmark on the implementation of 
comprehensive payment procedures is added together with three new benchmarks related to the 
conduction of a special audit on the payroll processes, development of recommendations to strengthen 
the payroll weaknesses, and their implementation by the MoF. The implementation of PBC 2 will be 
supported by SERP. 
PBC 3. Strengthen inter-governmental fiscal relations. New benchmarks on the implementation of the 
unified chart of account (UCoA) and publication of monthly fiscal reports using the new UCoA at the six-
digit level are added to incentivize harmonization efforts in budget preparation and accounting.  
PBC 4. Strengthen FGS transfers to FMS. The original benchmarks were revised to allow the calculation of 
the FGS transfers’ outturn rate for the whole year and not the half-year to better capture the flow of FGS 
transfers.  
PBC 5. Strengthen public administration. New benchmarks on the implementation of the pension reform, 
pay and grading system, as well as enhancing the role of women in leadership positions in the civil service 
are added. The implementation of PBC 5 will be supported by FCDO and SERP. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 116 
 
PBC 6. Wage bill management. A new PBC is added to increase transparency and improve management of 
the FGS wage bill.34  
43. 
The proposed reform benchmarks are deliberately relatively granular in nature. This is because systems 
reform progress at the FGS level has, in recent years, taken advantage of short-term windows of opportunity. 
The reforms selected as benchmarks are linked to the ongoing portfolio of World Bank projects, as well as the 
IMF ECF, and represent key intermediary reform steps. 
44. 
Disbursements against PBCs can be made only if sufficient qualifying eligible expenditures have been 
incurred, referred to as the Eligible Expenditure Program (EEP). The EEP is comprised of the FGS non-security 
sector civil servants wage bill, as provided in the annual Appropriation Act,35 plus eligible salaries of teachers in 
the Benadir region36 managed by FGS, net of RCRF share of financing and exceptions identified by the MA (table 
3).     
Table 3. RCRF financing as a share of EEP, US$ million 
  
CY2019 
CY2020 
CY2021 
CY2022  
CY2023 
CY2024 
CY2025 
FGS non-security sector formalized civil 
service  
35.3 
34.7 
35 
35 
35 
35 
35 
Benadir teachers  
  
  
3 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
Expanded EEP 
35.3 
34.7 
38.0 
38.0 
38.0 
38.0 
38.0 
RCRF financing (parent project + AF) 
14.09 
14 
19.97 
28.34 
16.75 
17.75 
3.2 
    Baseline civil service financing 
6.99 
7 
7.5 
6 
5.5 
5 
3.2 
    FGS RCRF II DLIs  
7.1 
7 
8.77 
11.7437 
  
  
  
    FGS RCRF III PBCs 
  
  
  
7 
6.5 
8 
 
    FMS RCRF III PBCs 
  
  
3.7 
3.6 
4.75 
4.75 
 
RCRF total financing as a share of EEP  
40% 
40% 
53% 
75% 
44% 
47% 
8% 
RCRF baseline financing as a share of EEP 
20% 
20% 
20% 
16% 
14% 
13% 
8% 
 
Component 2: Strengthen intergovernmental fiscal relations  
Subcomponent 2.1. Supporting inter-governmental fiscal forums and Secretariat 
45. 
The AF will provide support to the fiscal federalism agenda and federal entities. Specifically, the AF will 
continue support of the IGFF and Secretariat as well as to sectoral (health, education) intergovernmental 
forums. It will also provide technical assistance for analytical outputs in the areas of fiscal transfers, a revenue 
sharing formula, functional decentralization in service delivery. As SERP provides technical assistance on the 
harmonization of PFM and DRM systems between FGS and the FMS, a key priority for the RCRF will be to 
reinforce communication and coordination between the FGS and the FMS for strengthened intergovernmental 
fiscal relations. Support to the intergovernmental dialogue platform on civil service reforms initiated under the 
 
34 For a detailed PBC description, changes, amounts, and verification protocols see PBC Matrix in Section VIII and Annex 3. 
35 Object codes 2111 and 2112 of Somalia Annual Appropriation Acts (2020-2022) 
36 Object code 21312 of Somalia Annual Appropriation Acts (2020-2022) 
37 Includes RCRF II (i) DLI2.2, DLI5.3, DLI8.2.2, DLI9.1, and DLI14.2 in the amount of US$4.87 million that are met, but have not been 
disbursed, and (ii) DLI3.2, DLI3.3, DLI10.2, DLI13.1, DLI15.2, and DLI15.3 in the amount of US$6.87 million that are likely to be met by 
June 2022, the RCRF II closing date. DLI8.2.1, DLI8.3.1, DLI8.3.2, DLI9.2.1, DLI9.2.2, DLI11, DLI12.2, DLI12.3, and DLI14.3 in the amount of 
US$7 million are less likely to be met by June 2022 and are not included. Some of these benchmarks will be moved to RCRF III but with 
the lesser amounts. The details on the status of RCRF II DLIs as of May 10, 2022 are provided in Annex 2.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 116 
 
RCRF will be taken up by SERP to avoid duplication of activities and ensure stronger technical assistance support 
to the harmonization agenda.    
Subcomponent 2.2. Reform benchmarks for improved governance and service delivery at the FMS level (PBCs) 
46. 
FMS-level PBCs are revised. Three service-delivery PBCs (formerly PBCs 6, 7, and 8) are now regrouped 
into two PBCs (PBCs 7 and 8), their verification protocols are streamlined, and greater focus is placed on 
intergovernmental transfers and functional assignments. Originally designed FMS level PBCs were cumbersome 
and required extensive documentation, at times duplicative. A new PBC 9 is added to incentivize FMS-level 
achievements and harmonization efforts in PFM and DRM to support reforms to be implemented under SERP. 
Emphasis on improved service delivery due to climate-related illnesses and events is also added for health and 
education service delivery. 
47. 
 A step-by-step and iterative approach to FMS-level reform benchmarks will be applied weighing the 
benefits and risks. Several lessons learned have been considered in revising the PBCs. First, FMS still have limited 
capacities and understanding of the PBC-based financing mechanism. Second, launching new initiatives (such as 
performance-based school grants program) through PB financing without project allocations to support design, 
piloting, and expansion have proved challenging; the approach has been revisited to ensure adequate levels of 
technical assistance in the implementation of FMS PBCs. Finally, additional measures to increase accountability 
and transparency in the use of PB financing are required and should be aligned with SERP support. PBCs to the 
FMS and transfers will be earmarked to strengthen the use of funds for the purpose intended, increase 
transparency, and limit/avoid wastage in the fiscally stressed environments of the respective FMS. PBC 7 will 
finance the implementation of annual community health service delivery plans and FHW program, which will be 
monitored through the relevant budgetary appropriations, submission of the health service delivery plans, and 
implementation and financial reports. PBC 8 will finance salaries of teachers, non-teacher education staff, and 
non-salary recurrent costs of education ministries. FMS will be required to provide a detailed plan for financing 
such expenditures as stipulated in POM to avoid double dipping from Component 3.2. PBC 9 will finance 
strategic staffing needs to be identified under the SERP, keeping in mind wage bill and fiscal stress implications, 
as well as eligible non-salary recurrent costs (NSRC). A detailed financing plan will need to be submitted in 
accordance with POM.  
48. 
 The wage bill for FGS non-security sector civil servants and Benadir Regional Administration (BRA) 
teacher salaries will continue to form the EEP for FMS level PBCs. A co-financing arrangement for FMS civil 
servants and teacher salaries will be pursued, and once agreed, the FMS civil servant wage bill and FMS teacher 
salaries may be included in the EEP.  
Subcomponent 2.3. Strengthening resource management systems 
49. 
Subcomponent 2.3 of the parent project is revised and activities to be financed by the AF have been 
aligned with the upcoming SERP and the PREMIS phase two project funded by the FCDO. Several originally 
planned activities in the areas of capacity building in PFM for FMS ministries, departments, and agencies 
(MDAs), harmonizing PFM and DRM legislation, and improving automatic fiscal data sharing between FGS and 
FMS are excluded from RCRF support, as these activities will continue under the SERP. Support to developing 
the institutional capabilities of FMS MDAs will be focused on the ministries of finance, health and education in 
the areas of finance, accounting and financial reporting, procurement, human resources and internal audit. 
Subcomponent 2.3 will support the Office of the Accountant General (OAG) in developing OAGs in FMS, 
assessing needs for professionalization and training for the government’s accounting cadres, developing a three-
year strategic plan, and maintaining strategic regional partnerships. The subcomponent will also finance FMS 
EAFS salaries and their professionalization with emphasis given to training around the linkages between PFM 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 116 
 
and DRM to enhance budget execution and resilience during climate change induced disasters. The 
subcomponent will also support building up expertise and sharing experiences across the World Bank’s 
operations in the health and education sectors in Somalia. FMS social/gender-based violence (GBV) specialist 
positions and their travel, community mobilization, and monitoring activities will be financed from this 
subcomponent. The expertise and knowledge exchange will help to enhance health and education service 
delivery, particularly when they are interrupted because of climate-induced events.  
Subcomponent 2.4. Supporting local governance within FMS 
50. 
A new subcomponent to support the local governance agenda within FMS is being added. While further 
engagement with FGS and the FMS will be required, preliminary areas of support, complementing the needs of 
the growing Bank urban-focused investments, include: (i) fostering intra-FMS dialogue with and capacity 
building of municipal/district governments selected in accordance with criteria set forth in the POM on 
functional (health and education) and fiscal decentralization; (ii) funding technical assistance on the 
implementation of property taxation, which may include urban property surveys, property registers, and 
property tax revenue sharing arrangements in selected FMS; (iii) building capacity of fit-for-purpose PFM and 
payroll systems in selected municipalities/districts; (iv) promoting citizen engagement at all levels of 
government per demand; and (v) advising on mechanisms to enable emergency financing in response to climate-
related and other disasters. The potential for implementing a district grants program will be explored. This 
subcomponent will be carried out in close coordination with the United Nations’ JPLG Program and United 
Nations Community Development Fund. 
Component 3: Transfers for core government functions and foundational education and health service 
delivery mechanisms in eligible FMS 
Subcomponent 3.1. Financing core government functions 
51. 
This AF will provide financing of FMS recurrent costs. The subcomponent, through transfers from the 
FGS to FMS, will continue financing (a) non-salary recurrent costs, (b) salaries and allowances of Eligible Civil 
Servants (excluding elected officials) in selected MDAs, and (b) strengthening the institutional capacity of eligible 
FMS MoFs capacity to manage donor funds in selected MDAs.  
52. 
The AF will continue leveraging the participation eligibility criteria38 for incentivizing the transparency 
of financial reporting. Fiscal reporting eligibility criteria in POM will be revisited to emphasize the quality and 
consistency of fiscal reporting and its automation in line with the broader harmonized CoA and reporting 
dialogue. The criteria will also be expanded to promote basic system strengthening, including fiscal 
transparency, basic payroll, and PFM controls, as well as to secure the reforms achieved.  
Subcomponent 3.2. Financing education service delivery 
53. 
The AF will continue supporting the FGS and the FMS education ministries to strengthen their core 
systems for delivering and managing education services. RCRF AF will continue financing teacher salaries, non-
teacher education staff, and other recurrent expenses in FMS/BRA. The structure of teacher salaries in each 
FMS/BRA and their funding sources will be continuously revised while considering fiscal affordability and 
improved access to education for less advantaged children in communities most vulnerable to climate change. 
 
38 The Participation Eligibility Criteria are a set of measures that both FGS and the FMS must meet to continue benefiting from each 
project subcomponent. The Participation Eligibility Criteria were established to promote basic system strengthening, including 
intergovernmental relations, fiscal transparency, and basic payroll and PFM controls. The Participation Eligibility Criteria may be revised 
as part of the RCRF annual and mid-year reviews. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 116 
 
A scale-up of teacher financing may be considered only in FMS that are ready to include teacher and non-teacher 
education staff salaries in EEP and to provide co-financing. In close coordination with SERP, which proposes to 
support sustainable and efficient planning, budget allocations, expenditure management, and HRM in FGS/FMS, 
RCRF will continue to support system strengthening activities through improvements in HR policies and payroll 
management processes and by incentivizing the participation of women in the teacher cadre through 
participation eligibility criteria and other tools as stipulated in the POM. 
54. 
The parent project’s plans to pilot a performance-based school grants program are dropped to avoid 
fragmentation of World Bank support. The Education for Human Capital Development Project, which became 
effective on December 24, 2021, intends to finance school grants to enable newly constructed schools to meet 
recurrent expenditures and ensure the schools maintain conducive learning environments and do not impose 
fees for disadvantaged children. Considering that the education project is better positioned to implement the 
performance-based school grants by leveraging economies of scale through technical assistance and building 
the capacities of FMS, head teachers, and community education committees to implement, administer, and 
provide oversight to the grants program, RCRF will no longer support the performance-based grants program. 
There was no disbursement made against the performance-based school program from the parent project, 
therefore it is now excluded from the disbursement category 2 of the Financing Agreement.   
55. 
RCRF will closely coordinate with the education project (P172434) to ensure that RCRF-financed 
teachers benefit from the teacher professional development program, improve their teaching quality, and 
raise their students’ outcomes. RCRF will continue financing school supervision activities between now and 
December 2023, but the technical design will be supported by the education project to ensure interlinkages 
with the school grants program and other activities envisaged under the education project. While continuing 
RCRF financing of school supervision, the emphasis will be on using digital tools, reporting by head teachers, 
encouraging self-assessment, reducing costs for sustainability, and incorporating climate change mitigation and 
resilience assessment into the school supervision checklist. Digital data reporting and self-assessment will 
increasingly replace physical supervision visits, minimize operational disruptions caused by climate-induced 
events, including flooding, 39 and decrease long-distance travel by half, thus contributing to reduced greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions, which are in line with the revised Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) targets of 
30 percent. 
Subcomponent 3.3. Financing health service delivery 
56. 
The AF will support the scale-up of the ‘Marwo Caafimaad’ FHW program with government-led delivery. 
With around 900 FHWs recruited and trained, and the ambition of reaching 3,000 FHWs across Somalia by 2025, 
the AF will support enhanced FMS capacities in the FHW program management, improved data collection and 
analysis, data linkage with Health Management and Information System (HMIS), increased cost-efficiency in 
supportive supervision activities, and improved training materials based on lessons learned. Since communities 
served by FHWs often suffer from climate-related events and are more susceptible to cholera and other water-
borne illnesses, a special training component will be developed to sensitize FHWs on climate-change risks and 
mitigation measures at the community level. Through extensive household-level digital data collection, FHWs 
will generate knowledge on the spread of climate-induced diseases and will help identify vulnerable 
communities at risk of severe illness and death because of floods and cyclones. This subcomponent will leverage 
 
39 UNOCHA (United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs) (2021), Somalia Humanitarian Bulletin Available at: 
https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/somalia-humanitarian-bulletin-april-2021 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 116 
 
the data collected to help inform vulnerability maps and identify the most appropriate locations to deploy FHW 
when climate-induced disasters occur. 
57. 
In locations where the Damal Caafimaad project is implemented, the FHWs will be integrated into the 
health programs for purposes of training, support, supervision, and monitoring. The NGOs contracted by the 
Damal Caafimaad to deliver essential packages of health services in those specific regions will have additional 
oversight, wherever needed, for the FHWs and supervisors under their jurisdiction to provide ongoing 
mentorship and training, supervision and reporting, and provision of essential supplies. An independent MA 
procured under the Damal Caafimaad project will also support the FHW verification and validation processes. 
Continuous monitoring of FHW program results and mid-term impact evaluation will provide insights into the 
program’s effectiveness and inform policy decisions regarding future expansion of government-led community 
health programs across Somalia.   
58. 
Community health plans financed through PBCs will also be expanded to support last-mile service 
delivery and increase budget allocations to the health sector. Service delivery transfer agreements signed 
between the FGS and FMS will be further strengthened and reoriented toward functional assignments in health 
service delivery. With regard to service delivery at the community level, the project will prioritize areas where 
health indicators are lagging, especially in uptake of modern family planning methods and childhood 
immunization, and where communities have been affected by climate-related events. 
59. 
Substantial progress has been achieved in promoting the use of digital tools to improve the 
performance of the FHW program.40 Going forward, the focus will be on building FGS and FMS Ministry of 
Health (MoH) capacities in ensuring uptake of energy efficient digital tools, developing and implementing day-
to-day performance metrics, and using information to enhance the program’s planning. To ensure integrity and 
transparency of performance and investments into the program and to improve delivery of services to Somali 
citizens, no new FHW/FHS will be recruited and deployed in any state or the BRA unless the digital performance 
management, data collection, and training tools (and a system of pharmaceutical procurement and supplies), 
with standards developed by FGS, are fully deployed to and in use by existing staff.   
60. 
Based on lessons learned from the previous iteration of the FHW program, the scale-up ambition and 
pace, as well as implementation support arrangements are being revisited (see Annex 1 for a detailed 
description of implementation challenges). Given capacity constraints, no more than 600 new FHW/FHS will be 
selected, trained, and deployed annually. The role of a Health Technical Partner (HTP)41 will be limited to four 
key functions – verification of FHW and salary payments, provision of medical supplies, training, and data 
management. Going forward, alternative solutions for the procurement and distribution of medical supplies 
though a United Nations system and verification of FHW/FHS by an Independent Verification Agent will be 
tested. Linking FHWs to the national health systems will be prioritized.  
 
 
 
40 All FHWs have been provided with a tablet, solar charging system, training, software tools, and monthly data money to enable them 
to report on their daily activity, with geo-tagging and photo evidence, where necessary (provided the security situation allows such ICT 
use), to help strengthen their day-to-day work. More than two dozen videos have been translated and their use rights procured to 
improve the quality of training and behavior change communication with communities. 
41 The original financing agreement of the parent project requires that a health technical partner is to be engaged to assist the FMS with 
the implementation of FHW program, including procuring pharmaceuticals, managing and supervising the program, developing the 
program’s operational systems, strengthening linkages between program services and health facilities, and supporting/devising 
measures, including the use of digital tools, to increase the effectiveness and reach of program coverage and services.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 116 
 
Component 4: Citizen engagement and feedback 
61. 
The AF will continue the parent project’s budget transparency activities beyond June 2023. Specifically, 
the AF will support public participation in budget development and scrutiny of execution by facilitating public 
hearings and by capturing citizen feedback on budget execution at the community level. In addition to 
dissemination of budget data and reports, the AF will stimulate use of this information by supporting the 
development of quarterly policy briefs on the budget by a Somali think tank; holding of public hearings by the 
MoF and Parliament that include the private sector, CSOs, academia, and vulnerable groups, including those 
most susceptible to climate-related disasters and diseases; and training for media to read and analyze budget 
reports and a workshop to develop related media content. Budget transparency and citizen engagement 
activities will be closely coordinated with the SERP. The AF will lead budget transparency efforts at the FGS level 
with mass media promotion and beneficiary engagement with talk shows, public service announcements, and 
targeted messaging on social media that will be coupled with more analog channels such as radio shows, 
billboards, and public events to address the digital divide. A communications strategy outlining audience 
segmentation, objectives and desired outcomes, and channels for implementation will be developed and 
implemented. SERP will focus on FMS key budget documentation, parliamentary scrutiny, citizens’ budgets, and 
engagement of citizens in the budgeting process and will be able to learn from the experience of the FGS.  
62. 
The parent project’s activities in promoting citizenry participation in service delivery at community level 
are reoriented from mapping and stakeholder analysis to the implementation and roll out.  The services of a 
Mogadishu-based Citizen Engagement Center (CEC) established under the parent project will be used for 
establishing a two-way communication with selected service providers and service recipients for collecting 
feedback, verification of service delivery, behavior change, and promoting community compacts between 
users/beneficiaries and service providers. The CEC will also help inform citizens, including pregnant women, of 
the level of services they should expect and subsequently develop a level of accountability. The AF will focus on 
institutionalizing citizen engagement initiatives across ministries of finance, health, and education at the 
national and federal levels to make it a truly government owned, managed, and led activity. A new results 
indicator is added that measures the number of beneficiaries contacted, feedback received, government 
response/corrective measures taken and reported closing the feedback loop. 
 
Component 5: Project management 
63. 
Project management and implementation modalities will largely remain unchanged. Due to the 
upcoming closure of the DRM & PFM Project (P151492) in June 2022, the PFM Reform Coordination Unit, which 
served as an implementation support unit for both RCRF and DRM &P FM projects, is reorganized into the RCRF 
Project Implementation Unit (PIU). At the FMS level, project managers financed under the education project will 
support RCRF activities and their linkages with the education project. As noted earlier, the parent project’s 
requirement is for the FGS to select and engage verification consultant(s) to assist the OAuG in preparing the 
PBC verification reports. As the DRM & PFM project that financed a verification consultant is closing, the AF will 
finance such a consultant going forward. Regular policy and technical level discussions will be encouraged, in 
line with POM requirements, to review the status of PBCs semi-annually, agree on reform actions, and ensure 
timely completion of benchmarks, with reports submitted to the FGS Minister of Finance and the World Bank. 
Enhanced emphasis in project management at all levels will be on climate risks as well as environmental and 
social standards to be jointly financed through subcomponent 2.3 and component 5. 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 116 
 
Components’ structure, fund sources and allocations 
64. 
The overall component structure and allocations for RCRF III and AF are summarized in Table 5, showing 
both component allocations for RCRF III (no shading) and AF (shaded in gray). The project will be co-financed 
by a grant provided under the Somalia Multi-Partner Fund in the amount of US$30 million (SMFP Grant 
No.TF0B8760)42. The total amount of US$92 million is sufficient to finance full-scale activities up to December 
2024 and partial financing of the recurrent costs in the first half of 2025 (table 4). 
Table 4. RCRF financing by components, US$ million 
 
CY2020 
CY2021 
CY2022 
CY2023 
CY2024 
CY2025 
Total 
Component 1: Recurrent cost finance to reform resource 
management systems 
0 
0 
13 
12 
13 
3.2 
41.2 
1.1 Financing eligible civil service salaries in FGS: Baseline 
 
 
6 
1.3 
 
 
7.3 
1.1 Financing eligible civil service salaries in FGS: Baseline 
(RCRF III AF) 
 
 
 
4.2 
5 
3.2 
12.4 
1.2 Financing eligible civil service salaries in FGS: Reform 
benchmarks (PBCs/DLIs) 
 
 
5 
1.25 
 
 
6.25 
1.2 RCRF III AF new PBCs  
 
 
2 
5.25 
8 
 
15.25 
Component 2: Strengthen intergovernmental fiscal relations 
0.5 
5.9 
6.4 
7.25 
7.35 
0 
27.4 
2.1 Supporting intergovernmental forums and Secretariat  
0.2 
0.2 
0.8 
0.2 
 
 
1.4 
2.1 Supporting intergovernmental forums and Secretariat 
(RCRF III AF) 
 
 
 
0.6 
0.8 
 
1.4 
2.2 Reform benchmarks for improved governance and service 
delivery at FMS-level (PBCs)  
 
3.7 
3.6 
4.4 
 
 
11.7 
2.2 Reform benchmarks for improved governance and service 
delivery at FMS-level (RCRF III AF)  
 
 
 
0.35 
4.75 
 
5.1 
2.3 Strengthening resource management systems  
0.3 
2 
2 
0.3 
 
 
4.6 
2.3 Strengthening resource management systems (RCRF III AF)  
 
 
 
0.7 
0.8 
 
1.5 
2.4 (New) Local governance  
 
 
 
0.7 
1 
 
1.7 
Component 3: Transfers for core government functions and 
foundational education and health service delivery 
mechanisms in eligible FMS 
0 
1.5 
23.2 
22.2 
21.7 
8.7 
77.3 
3.1 Financing core government functions  
 
0.5 
8.2 
2.1 
 
 
10.8 
3.1 Financing core government functions (RCRF III AF) 
 
 
 
6.1 
8.2 
5.5 
19.8 
3.2 Financing education service delivery  
 
0.5 
7.5 
2.1 
 
 
10.1 
3.2 Financing education service delivery (RCRF III AF) 
 
 
 
3.9 
5.5 
 
9.4 
3.3 Financing health service delivery  
 
0.5 
7.5 
2.1 
 
 
10.1 
3.3 Financing health service delivery (RCRF III AF) 
 
 
 
5.9 
8 
3.2 
17.1 
Component 4: Citizen engagement and feedback  
0 
1.1 
1.1 
1 
0.9 
0 
4.1 
 
42 The projects financed under the SMPF have adopted a portfolio wide strategy of tranching Grant Agreements for projects 
commensurate with the available cash flow in the SMPF. As the World Bank’s practice is to sign grant agreements on a cash basis, the 
budgets for most of the MPF projects have been tranched into a series of grants. The first SMPF Grant Agreement is to be signed for 
US$5 million and to be financed from SMPF - Parallel Trust Fund, Trustee: TF072600; Window: TF083270. The remaining US$25 million 
of the grant will become available in tranches starting from the first quarter of FY2024. The grant will be topped up via amendment(s) to 
the SMPF grant agreement and channeled through either SMPF - Parallel Trust Fund, Trustee: TF072600; Window: TF083270; or SMPF 
2, Trustee: TF073249; Window: TF084365.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 116 
 
 
CY2020 
CY2021 
CY2022 
CY2023 
CY2024 
CY2025 
Total 
4.1 Deepening and widening the existing budget transparency 
efforts 
 
0.3 
0.3 
0.1 
 
 
0.7 
4.1 Deepening and widening the existing budget transparency 
efforts (RCRF III AF) 
 
 
 
0.2 
0.3 
 
0.5 
4.2 Support mapping, citizen feedback, and corrective 
measures at the local Level 
 
0.5 
0.5 
0.1 
 
 
1.1 
4.2 Support mapping, citizen feedback, and corrective 
measures at the local Level (RCRF III AF) 
 
 
 
0.4 
0.5 
 
0.9 
4.3 Impact evaluation to citizen feedback in education and 
health 
 
0.3 
0.3 
0.1 
 
 
0.7 
4.3 Impact evaluation to citizen feedback in education and 
health (RCRF III AF) 
 
 
 
0.1 
0.1 
 
0.2 
Component 5: Project management 
0.05 
0.3 
2.7 
3.03 
3.1 
1.25 
10.43 
5.1 FGS project management costs (RCRF III) 
 
0.1 
1.6 
0.4 
 
 
2.1 
5.1 FGS project management costs (RCRF III AF) 
 
 
 
1.2 
1.6 
0.75 
3.55 
5.2 FMS project management costs (RCRF III) 
 
0.1 
1 
0.2 
 
 
1.3 
5.2 FMS project management costs (RCRF III AF) 
 
 
 
0.8 
1 
0.5 
2.3 
5.3 Independent verification agent (IVA) support for PBCs 
0.05 
0.1 
0.1 
0.03 
 
 
0.28 
5.3 Independent verification agent (IVA) support for PBCs 
 
 
 
0.4 
0.5 
 
0.9 
RCRF III Total 
0.55 
8.7 
44.3 
14.65 
0 
0 
68.2 
RCRF AF Total 
 
 
2 
30.8 
46 
13.15 
92 
 
C. 
Proposed Changes to the Results Framework   
65. 
The results framework is revised to reflect the changes in the AF. Specifically, the PDO indicator on the 
number of students enrolled in schools that receive performance-based school grants is replaced as the 
performance-based school grants program is being dropped. The new indicator will measure the number of 
schools supervised annually using digital tools and self-assessment. Intermediate-level indicators are aligned 
with the revised PBC, and target values are extended till 2025. Intermediate indicators relating to service 
delivery and citizen engagement are further refined. The proposed changes are aligned with the theory of 
change and the revised indicators will better capture the progress towards the PDO. Table 5 and Section VIII 
provides details on the suggested changes to the results framework. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 116 
 
Table 5. Key changes to the results framework 
Original indicator 
Proposed changes 
PDO indicator 
 
Students enrolled in schools that receive performance-
based school grants (dis-aggregated by gender) 
Replaced by: “Number of schools that are supervised annually 
using digital tools, including self-assessment” 
Intermediate Results Indicators  
 
Consolidated fiscal reports published online by FGS MoF 
Target changed from quarterly to monthly 
Schools participating in performance grant program 
receive annual grant in a timely manner 
Replaced by: Share of teachers reporting timely payment of 
salaries through citizen engagement mechanisms, disaggregated 
by gender 
 
New: The share of FHWs complying with the monthly 
requirements of reporting with the prescribed digital tools 
Citizen engagement in education and health 
Replaced by: Number of total beneficiaries connected with through 
citizen engagement ICT systems, disaggregated by target beneficiary 
group and Percentage of people who shared feedback through citizen 
engagement ICT systems and were responded to with corrective 
actions taken by government, disaggregated by target beneficiary 
group 
Intermediate results indicators linked to PBCs 
Revised to align with the updated list of PBCs 
 
D. 
Crosscutting Activities  
66. 
The project aligns with the World Bank’s commitment to address the impacts of climate change. 
Somalia is vulnerable to increasingly severe droughts, flooding, and cyclone events that will put its population at 
risk. The RCRF III AF will provide technical assistance (TA) on mechanisms at the local governance level to enable 
emergency financing in response to climate-related and other disasters, including TA on decentralizing decision-
making for a more effective and efficient response and recovery process following severe floods and cyclones 
(subcomponent 2.4). Digital tools will also be leveraged to strengthen education and health delivery functions, 
particularly those related to climate change. Digital data reporting and self-assessments will replace the need for 
physical supervision visits, which can be interrupted by climate-related disasters. Digitization will also reduce 
travel time and contribute to lower GHG emissions. The country submitted its revised NDCs and set a target of 
reducing emissions by 30 percent against the business-as-usual scenario. This goal is also reflected in Somalia’s 
national development aspirations, plans, strategies, and actions in the energy, agriculture, forestry, transport, 
and waste sectors.43 The use of solar charges by FHWs contributes to the use of clean energy and lower GHG 
emissions. As climate-related disasters become more frequent, Somalia is expected to see a rise in cholera, 
malaria, and other water-borne diseases. Training materials will be developed to ensure that FHWs are able to 
respond to the most vulnerable communities affected by climate change. Training materials will also include 
guidelines for medical waste management plans to reduce environmental and climate impact. Increased budget 
allocations through PBC 7 will, in addition, allow the health sector to prioritize health service delivery to 
vulnerable communities to ensure vaccines and medications are mobilized to treat illnesses that are exacerbated 
by climate change.  
67. 
The AF will promote the inclusion of women in governance structures, service delivery, and citizen 
engagement scaling up relevant activities of the parent project, which is gender tagged. Specifically, the RCRF 
 
43https://ndcpartnership.org/news/somalia-submits-enhanced-ndc-recognizing-climate-crisis%E2%80%99-urgency-emphasizing-
adaptation 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 116 
 
III AF will (i) enhance the role of women in leadership positions in civil service through a dedicated PBC;44 (ii) 
promote women’s participation in the teacher cadre through participation eligibility criteria; (iii) expand the 
coverage of the FHW program with the ambition of reaching 3,000 FHWs across Somalia (currently, 900 FHWs 
have been recruited and trained); and (iv) support gender-sensitive citizen engagement activities, such as 
outreach to female FHW service recipients, especially pregnant women and mothers, through the call center and 
mobilization of women’s groups at the community level for interactions on health issues. Notably, a PDO 
indicator and two intermediate results indicators have a gender focus, i.e., the PDOs FHW selected according to 
guidelines, trained, and actively providing services; number of total unique beneficiaries connected though 
citizen engagement ICT systems, disaggregated by target beneficiary group, including women; and share of 
teachers reporting timely payment of salaries through citizen engagement mechanisms, disaggregated by 
gender.  
KEY RISKS 
68. 
The overall risk rating for RCRF III AF is High. The key risks and proposed mitigation measures are outlined 
below. 
69. 
Political and governance risks are High. Somalia remains a high-risk environment for institution building 
and development financing. Risk of political instability remains high and could slow or derail reforms over the 
course of the project. The completion of protracted parliamentary elections on April 14, 2022, and subsequent 
election of the new president on May 15, 2022, are important milestones.  A new government is yet to be formed, 
which will determine the demand for this project and reform priorities for the next two-three years. Political 
contestation and potential revival of conflict are further risks. Levels of insecurity and violence may increase. 
Dialogue and intergovernmental collaboration between FGS and the FMS could be disrupted. The principal 
mitigation measures for these risks include substantial consultation with, and engagement of, multiple categories 
of stakeholders beyond politically appointed leaders and establishment of a consultative process in which project 
management engages on a regular basis during preparation and implementation to ensure visibility and generate 
expectations for the project’s outcomes. Support to the Intergovernmental Fiscal Federalism Forum and sectoral 
intergovernmental coordination platforms (in health and education) have proved instrumental in reaching 
agreements at technical levels and preparing the ground for high-level policy dialogue.  
70. 
The macroeconomic risk is High. The macroeconomic risk remains high due to limited, yet increasing, 
capacity of the government to respond to external shocks on the nascent formal economy. The impact of drought 
and floods has been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic and rising commodity prices due to the invasion of 
Ukraine. Given that the economy’s mainstay is agriculture, climate shocks could lower agricultural output, 
damage infrastructure, exacerbate water stress, and displace people. Successive droughts and heavy rains, such 
as the severe drought in 2017 and 2019 and worsening drought conditions in 2021 and 2022, have taken a large 
toll on the country, aggravating the humanitarian challenges. Based on the latest assessment in March 2022, 4.5 
million people have been affected by the drought—a significant increase from 3.2 million in December 2021, 
while the number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) has almost tripled from 245,000 to 697,000 due to lack 
of food, water, and pasture.45 There is no fiscal space to allocate resources to respond to shocks. The FGS is in a 
challenging fiscal situation, and in the absence of external support, may run out of resources to pay for core 
 
44 This is covered under PBC 5 which specifies that a target of 30 percent ratio of women in senior leadership positions is achieved. This 
will be complimented by technical assistance provided by SERP. 
45 UNOCHA (United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs). 2022. Somalia: Drought Situation Report No. 5 (As of 20 
March 2022).  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 116 
 
government expenditures by mid-2022, which could result in the accumulation of arrears and heightened social 
tensions. The persistent cycle of shocks increases Somalis’ vulnerability to future shocks as there is limited public 
and private insurance and access to finance. Furthermore, economic activity is likely to continue to be exposed 
to significant risks related to insecurity in Mogadishu and large parts of Somalia. Supporting improvements in 
domestic revenue administration, strengthened wage bill controls, close alignment with DPO and the IMF’s ECF 
program will help mitigate the risk.  
71. 
Sector strategies and policies risk are Substantial. Potential fragmentation of development partner 
support is a risk. Although project preparation reflects a highly consultative process, it is necessary to maintain 
dialogue with other donors throughout project implementation. Therefore, the project team will maintain 
regular communication with related project teams to ensure coordination and alignment. Co-financing by the 
SMPF grant will further reinforce the engagement with key development partners at project and sectoral level, 
including through the SMPF Consultative Group meetings and updates. 
72. 
Technical design of project risk is Substantial. The two main technical design risks are (i) scope of project 
activities, and (ii) weak institutional capacity. The RCRF III AF proposes to restructure and scale-up activities of a 
complex reform agenda, with multiple components cutting across key institutions and governments. Somalia’s 
administrative and sectoral institutions, however, have limited ability to rapidly absorb resources and human 
capital. In addition, the required intra- and inter-governmental coordination is weak. In this regard, the 
restructuring and scale-up of project components will build on lessons learned from RCRF III and previous phases 
and will introduce changes to activities and new components gradually to ensure government ownership and 
incremental capacity building tailored to the context. Implementation teams and TA will mitigate the complexity 
of risks. Close monitoring of work plans by the project steering committee and management team has proven 
critical in RCRF III and will remain so in the AF. Aligning performance benchmarks with the HIPC initiative, IMF 
ECF, upcoming Development Policy Operation, and technical assistance provided through SERP will support 
keeping focus on reforms areas. 
73. 
The institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risks are Substantial. Risks related to 
the government’s capacity to implement activities, considering the institutional capacity of the implementing 
agencies, implementation arrangements, and M&E arrangements, are Substantial. The government has 
commenced important public sector reforms and was able to attract domestic and diaspora talent to drive key 
reforms. However, the public sector lacks skilled managerial and professional staff, the missing middle, while at 
the same time it has been adding unskilled employees at the bottom of the pyramid. Therefore, the overall level 
of capacity in the public sector remains limited. The RCRF III has been addressing this by building additional 
capacity in key ministries, as well as by augmenting existing capacity with external support. The AF will further 
enhance these efforts and will continue to strengthen public sector systems and invest in education and health 
activities to support the development of human capital in the long term. 
74. 
The fiduciary residual risk is Substantial. Financial management and procurement capacity challenges 
exist that are likely to affect the project. These include lack of key financial management competencies and 
internal controls, reliance on consultants, and lack of regulatory framework for key PFM aspects, among others. 
The main risks associated with procurement are (i) limited number of competent procurement staff; (ii) weak 
capacity of bidders and limited service providers; (iii) high price bids or proposals due to security conditions in 
some parts of the country; (iv) fraud and corruption; (v) collusion among bidders due to limited competition; (vi) 
inadequate experience in procurement planning, monitoring, and contract management; (vii) delays in 
procurement implementation should the COVID-19 crisis be prolonged, due to disruptions in supply chains 
resulting in price volatility and unavailability of items; (viii) weak legal and financial institutions (commercial banks 
and insurance agencies are not well established); and (ix) lack of enforcement of the public regulatory framework 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase III (P177900) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 116 
 
(oversight institutions are not in place, the procurement management unit is not formalized, and no complaint 
handling body is in place). Various mitigating measures are designed both specific to the project and as part of 
other World Bank/Donor engagements in the country, which are detailed in Section C of the Appraisal Summary 
below.   
75. 
Other: Security risk is Substantial. Insecurity poses a risk to human security, project implementation, and 
project sustainability. It can create limitations on access to the operating environment, which in turn poses 
additional project risks, creating challenges for project implementation and monitoring. FHWs serving in Al-
Shabab-controlled or nearby areas, are prone to security risks in their catchment areas. As part of the risk 
mitigation approach, a project-level security risk management consultant has been recruited to develop the 
security risk assessment and management plan.   
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
A. 
Economic and Financial Analysis  
76. 
RCRF III AF has a strong economic rationale with important direct and indirect benefits. Anticipated 
benefits include strengthened intergovernmental fiscal relations, improvements in education and health 
outcomes, and a strengthened social contract between citizens and the state. Incentives through FGS reform 
benchmarks aim at generating further improvements in DRM, wage bill management, and public administration. 
Benefits are corroborated by empirical evidence from the literature estimating high cost-effectiveness of post-
conflict interventions in areas such as dialogue, institutional reform in core state functions, and redistributive 
policies, all of which are key areas of the AF.46  
77. 
Methodology. Given the paucity of economic data and the uncertainty in determining costs and benefits, 
a qualitative approach was chosen to conduct the economic analysis for this project. The following sections 
outline the economic rationale of the investment and present the anticipated direct and indirect benefits of the 
different project interventions. 
Economic Rationale 
78. 
Predictable financing for human development and building the social contract. The FGS and FMS fiscal 
space remains constrained. The project therefore provides a predictable source of financing to FGS and the FMS 
to finance important recurrent costs in sectors that are critical for improving human development (health and 
education). Financing these services in the nascent stages of state building is important for developing the social 
contract between state authorities and citizens. 
79. 
Intergovernmental transfers and dialogue. Support to the FMS is in the form of transfers from the FGS, 
which provides a basis for dialogue and developing trust among the jurisdictions. This form of intergovernmental 
dialogue is supported throughout this project. This type of dialogue, coupled with on-demand technical 
assistance, is important for agreeing upon crucial issues related to the sharing of revenues and agreement of 
functional assignments, which is fundamental to reaching a political settlement.  
 
46 Prevention is then defined as actions taken in high risk but highly uncertain environments that anticipate violence, aiming at preventing 
a future path of repeated episodes of conflict. Measures include, for example, capacity building (in core state functions), diplomatic efforts, 
mediation, and redistributive policies. See United Nations and World Bank (2018), Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing 
Violent Conflict (Washington, DC: World Bank); and Mueller and Hannes (2017), “How Much Is Prevention Worth? Background Paper for 
Pathways to Peace,” World Bank, Washington, DC. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia R