 
 
Document of 
The World Bank 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD4973  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT PAPER 
 
ON A  
 
PROPOSED SECOND ADDITIONAL GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 106.40 MILLION 
(US$143.00 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
 
FOR THE 
 
SHOCK RESPONSIVE SAFETY NET FOR HUMAN CAPITAL PROJECT 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
 
 
 
 
Social Protection and Jobs Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
 
(Exchange Rate Effective April 30, 2022) 
 
Currency Unit = SOS (Somali Shilling) 
US$1 = SOS 578.50 
US$1 = SDR 0.74 
 
 
 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
 
January 1 – December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Hafez M. H. Ghanem 
Country Director: Keith E. Hansen 
Regional Director: Amit Dar 
Practice Manager: Paolo Belli 
Task Team Leaders: Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi, Ashiq Aziz 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
 
AF 
Additional Financing 
MoLSA 
Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs 
ASA 
Advisory Services and Analytics 
MPA 
Multiphase Programmatic Approach 
CERC 
Contingent Emergency Response Component 
NDP 9 
Ninth National Development Plan 
CFM 
Complaints and Feedback Mechanism 
NSPSC 
National Social Protection Steering Committee 
CMB 
Cost of Minimum Expenditure Basket 
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
COVID-19 
Coronavirus Disease 2019 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework 
POM 
Project Operations Manual 
CSC 
Community Selection Committees 
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development 
CWG 
Cash Working Group 
SCALED-
UP 
Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and 
Entrepreneurship through Digital Uplift Project 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
SCRP 
Somalia Crisis Recovery Project 
ECT 
Emergency Cash Transfer 
SDR 
Special Drawing Rights 
ESCP 
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan 
SDWG 
Somalia Donor Working Group 
ESF 
Environmental and Social Framework 
SEAH 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse / Sexual Harassment 
ESRS 
Environmental and Social Review Summary 
SEP 
Stakeholders Engagement Plan 
ESS 
Environmental and Social Standards 
SeMP 
Security Management Plan 
FAM 
Famine Action Mechanism 
SMP 
Social Management Plan 
FAO 
Food and Agriculture Organization 
SNBS 
Somalia National Bureau of Statistics 
FCDO 
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office 
SNHCP 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project 
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict and Violence 
SNLRP 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Locust Response Project 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
SPWG 
Social Protection Working Group 
FMFA 
Financial Management Framework Agreement 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
FMS 
Federal Member States 
SURP II 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II 
GBV 
Gender-Based Violence 
SWALIM 
Somalia Water and Land Information Management 
GBVAP 
Gender-Based Violence Action Plan 
TPM 
Third-Party Monitoring 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
UN 
United Nations 
GRM 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
UNHCR 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service 
UNICEF 
United Nations Children’s Fund 
HIPC 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 
USC 
Use of Country Systems 
IDA 
International Development Association 
USR 
Unified Social Registry 
IDPs 
Internally Displaced Persons 
WAPR 
Water for Agropastoral Productivity and Resilience Project 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
 
 
IOM 
International Organization for Migration 
 
 
IPC 
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification 
 
 
ISR 
Implementation Status and Results Report 
 
 
LIC 
Low Income Country/Countries 
 
 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
 
MIS 
Management Information System 
 
 
ML/TF 
Money Laundering and Terror Financing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
    
I. 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING ........................................ 7 
 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING .................................................................... 15 
 
III. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 20 
 
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................................. 22 
 
V. WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS .............................................................................. 28 
 
VI    SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES ..................................................................................... 29 
 
VII   DETAILED CHANGES ...................................................................................................... 29 
 
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 32 
 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 9, 2022 
Page 1 of 38 
 
 
      
BASIC INFORMATION – PARENT (Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project - P171346) 
 
 
Country 
Product Line 
Team Leader(s) 
Somalia 
IBRD/IDA 
Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Resp CC 
Req CC 
Practice Area (Lead) 
P171346 
Investment Project 
Financing 
HAES2 (10211) AECE2 (6542) 
Social Protection & Jobs 
  
Implementing Agency: Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs 
 ADD FIN TBL1 
Is this a regionally tagged 
project? 
 
No 
 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
 
No 
 
Approval Date 
Closing Date 
Expected 
Guarantee 
Expiration Date 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
08-Aug-2019 
31-Aug-2023  
Substantial 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Parent 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach [MPA] 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[  ] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[✓] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 9, 2022 
Page 2 of 38 
 
Development Objective(s) 
 
The project development objective is to provide cash transfers to targeted poor and vulnerable households and 
establish the key building blocks of a national shock-responsive safety net system. 
 
Ratings (from Parent ISR) 
 RATING_DRAFT_NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation 
Latest ISR 
 
22-Nov-2019 
18-Jun-2020 
22-Dec-2020 
24-Jun-2021 
14-Jan-2022 
Progress towards 
achievement of 
PDO 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Overall 
Implementation 
Progress (IP) 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Overall ESS 
Performance 
MU 
 
MU 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Overall Risk 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Financial 
Management 
S 
 
S 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Project 
Management 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Procurement 
S 
 
S 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety 
Net for Human Capital Project - P178730) 
 
ADDFIN_TABLE 
Project ID 
Project Name 
Additional Financing Type 
Urgent Need or Capacity 
Constraints 
P178730 
Second Additional 
Financing for the Shock 
Responsive Safety Net for 
Cost Overrun/Financing 
Gap, Restructuring, Scale Up 
Yes 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 9, 2022 
Page 3 of 38 
 
Human Capital Project 
Financing instrument 
Product line 
Approval Date 
Investment Project 
Financing 
IBRD/IDA 
23-Jun-2022 
Projected Date of Full 
Disbursement 
Bank/IFC Collaboration   
 
 
30-Apr-2025 
No 
 
 
Is this a regionally tagged project? 
 
No 
 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Child 
 
 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[  ] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[✓] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
 
 Disbursement Summary (from Parent ISR) 
 
Source of Funds 
Net  
Commitments 
Total Disbursed 
Remaining Balance 
Disbursed 
IBRD 
 
 
 
  
 
 % 
IDA 
 175.00 
  87.65 
  80.61 
    
 
52 % 
Grants 
 
 
 
  
 
 % 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive 
Safety Net for Human Capital Project - P178730) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 9, 2022 
Page 4 of 38 
 
SUMMARY (Total Financing) 
 
Current Financing 
Proposed Additional 
Financing 
Total Proposed 
Financing 
Total Project Cost 
175.00 
143.00 
318.00 
Total Financing 
175.00 
143.00 
318.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
175.00 
143.00 
318.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILSNewFinEnh1- Additional Financing 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
143.00 
          IDA Grant 
143.00 
 
   
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Guarantee Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
0.00 
 143.00 
   0.00 
 143.00 
National PBA 
0.00 
 143.00 
   0.00 
 143.00 
Total 
0.00 
143.00 
   0.00 
143.00 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
Does the project require any other Policy waiver(s)? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 9, 2022 
Page 5 of 38 
 
 
ESStandards 
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Not Currently Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Not Currently Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Not Currently Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
ESStandardsNote 
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Social Protection & Jobs 
 
Contributing Practice Areas 
 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 9, 2022 
Page 6 of 38 
 
PROJECT TEAM 
 
Bank Staff 
Name 
Role 
Specialization 
Unit 
Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi 
Team Leader (ADM 
Responsible) 
 
HAES2 
Ashiq Aziz 
Team Leader 
 
HSASP 
Francis Akolu Muthuiya 
Procurement Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
 
EAERU 
Leonard Mutuku Matheka 
Financial Management 
Specialist (ADM Responsible) 
 
EAEG1 
Abdirahman Zeila Dubow 
Environmental Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
 
SAEE2 
Raymond Simon Maina 
Kirwa 
Social Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
 
SAES2 
Denis Nikitin 
Team Member 
 
HAES2 
Dhahabu Ibrahim Shair 
Team Member 
 
SAES2 
Khalid Ahmed Ali 
Moheyddeen 
Team Member 
 
HMNSP 
Late Felix Lawson 
Team Member 
 
WFACS 
Mariam Denise Brain 
Team Member 
 
HAES1 
Martin M. Serrano 
Counsel 
 
LEGAM 
Matuna Mushfeqa Mostafa 
Team Member 
 
HMNSP 
Nadia Selim 
Team Member 
 
HAES2 
Nyabicha Omurwa Onang'o Team Member 
 
EAEG1 
Peggy Ayako Kwendo 
Team Member 
 
AEMSO 
Roberto Claudio Sormani 
Team Member 
 
HECSP 
Sonia Plaza 
Team Member 
 
EAEF1 
Tewodros Assefa Besrat 
Team Member 
 
HAES1 
 
Extended Team 
Name 
Title 
Organization 
Location 
   
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 7 of 38 
 
I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
A. Introduction 
 
1. 
This Project Paper seeks approval of the World Bank Board of Executive Directors for an additional Grant in the 
amount of SDR 106.40 million (US$143.00 million equivalent) as a Second Additional Financing (AF) for the Somalia 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (SNHCP) (the parent Project, P171346). The proposed AF would 
scale up the SNHCP to respond to the current drought crisis affecting the country and ensure the continuity of a regular 
safety net program which delivers much needed cash assistance to chronically poor and vulnerable households who have 
been disproportionately affected by persistent shocks such as cyclical droughts and floods, the coronavirus disease 
(COVID-19) pandemic and the 2020-21 desert locust plague, among others. The proposed AF will include a restructuring 
to enable investments under the parent Project to support vertical and horizontal scale up of the safety net program 
effectively. It would not entail a revision of the Project Development Objective (PDO) or implementation arrangements 
but would require updates to the parent Project’s components and costs, results framework, and closing date. Given that 
the country remains characterized by fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) and low institutional capacity, the proposed 
AF is being processed in accordance with paragraph 12 of Bank Policy on Investment Project Financing (IPF), covering 
situations of urgent need or capacity constraints. 
 
2. 
The parent Project aims to provide cash transfers to targeted poor and vulnerable households and establish the 
key building blocks of a national shock-responsive safety net system. The Project (originally US$65 million, approved on 
August 8, 2019, and made effective on September 17, 2019) had helped to establish Somalia’s first safety net program – 
Baxnaano – which is intended to address chronic poverty and vulnerability with adaptive features allowing it to act in 
response to the various shocks consistently afflicting the country. The parent Project initially financed cash transfers for 
200,000 households, with children under five years of age, in selected districts across Somalia. A first AF (P176368) in the 
amount US$110 million equivalent, approved on June 17, 2021, and made effective on September 10, 2021, subsequently 
increased the duration of Baxnaano support for the same beneficiary cohort to ensure that efforts at improving human 
capital could be maintained. The proposed second AF would ensure the program is able to respond to the urgent food 
security needs of poor and vulnerable populations affected by the prevailing drought crisis which began in late 2021 and 
has reached alarming levels in recent months. It would also support a modest coverage increase of the regular Baxnaano 
program, while continuing to protect human capital investments, support the expansion of the social registry, and further 
refining the delivery systems for social assistance already financed by the Project. 
 
B. Country Context 
 
3. 
Somalia has experienced persistent civil unrest and insecurity over several decades but entered a new period 
of relative stability with the adoption of the Provisional Constitution in 2012, and the subsequent establishment of the 
Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and Federal Member States (FMS), which paved the path towards reconstruction 
and economic recovery. In 2020, Somalia reached a critical milestone under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) 
Initiative, which enabled the country to receive debt relief. This would enable Somalia to transition into the international 
financial system and receive critical resources towards accelerating growth and building resilience. Somalia’s GDP growth 
is estimated to have rebounded to 2.2 percent in 2021 following a contraction of 0.3 percent in 2020.1 The federal 
elections which began in 2021 have now concluded and the transition of security arrangements from the African Union 
 
1 The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank adopted the national accounts data (2012-2020) produced by the Somalia National Bureau 
of Statistics (SNBS) in December 2021. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 8 of 38 
 
to the FGS is well underway. The election of a new president after a protracted period of uncertainty has been welcomed 
by the international community with renewed commitments to collaborating on critical issues of drought response, 
maintaining fiscal stability, addressing insecurity, among others. 
 
4. 
Somalia is highly vulnerable to repeated cycles of droughts and floods driven by climate change, with around 
70 percent of the population living below the international poverty line with regular exposure to food insecurity, 
malnutrition, and loss of livelihoods. In 2018, the Center for Global Development ranked Somalia as the most vulnerable 
country to climate change among 167 countries, adjusted for coping capacity. The 2016-17 drought left an estimated 6.7 
million people in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. Between 2017 and 2021, droughts and floods led to the internal 
displacement of between 0.3 million to 1.1 million people annually, outpacing displacement on account of conflict and 
insecurity. As of March 2022, the drought has displaced 0.7 million persons, and overall, there are around 2.9 million 
internally displaced persons (IDP) in Somalia, largely as a consequence of climatic shocks, for whom food has been a 
priority need upon arrival to a new location.2 
 
5. 
Amid these cyclical shocks, the COVID-19 pandemic and the 2020-21 desert locust plague have compounded 
the adverse impacts on food supply and prices, livelihoods, and purchasing capacity among poor and vulnerable 
populations in Somalia. In 2020, the pandemic resulted in the loss of incomes for nearly 80 percent of households. As 
the country relies on food imports to feed its population, the lockdown of key supply markets, closure of borders and 
restrictions on domestic movements have resulted in high prices of basic commodity prices, and the economy contracted 
by an estimated 1.5 percent in 2020. The locust plague appearing at the same time caused widespread damage to crop 
harvest in affected regions, with devastating effects on livelihoods and incomes, and further exacerbated the food 
insecurity situation which fueled internal displacement and resource-based conflict. 
 
6. 
Somalia is now facing its worst drought crisis in decades resulting from several consecutive poor rainfall 
seasons. This latest shock starkly illustrates the increasing frequency and intensity of adverse climatic events to afflict 
the country. The food insecurity and malnutrition situation has significantly deteriorated since the first AF was approved 
by the World Bank in June 2021. Estimates for the first half of 2022 place approximately 6.0 million people (up by 3.3 
million) across the country at high levels of acute food insecurity and asset depletion as a coping mechanism (i.e. 
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) Phase 3 and above on the severity scale)3 in the absence of urgent 
assistance.4 Around 1.4 million children (up by 0.6 million) under the age of five years are likely to be acutely 
malnourished, including nearly 329,500 (up by 186,500) who may face severe malnourishment.5 The combined shocks 
thus have a severe negative effect on households’ ability to meet basic consumption needs. 
 
7. 
The country’s extreme crisis exposure is exacerbated by the ongoing war in Ukraine which poses a risk to 
international development assistance on which FGS still largely relies. Overall international support to the country is 
 
2 International Organization for Migration (IOM). Somalia Drought Response (January–March 2022). Operational Data Portal of the United Nations 
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). 
 
3 IPC is multi-partner initiative to classify the severity and magnitude of food insecurity and malnutrition to facilitate decision-making. The severity 
phases are (1) minimal/none, (2) stressed, (3) crisis, (4) emergency, and (5) catastrophe/famine. 
 
4 IPC. 2022. Somalia: Acute Food Insecurity Situation (Update March 2022 and April–June 2022). Most recent data is compared with Acute 
Malnutrition Situation (January-March 2021 and Projection for April-July 2021). 
 
5 IPC. 2022. Somalia: Acute Food Insecurity Situation (January 2022 and Projections for February–March 2022 and April–June 2022). Most recent 
data is compared with Acute Malnutrition Situation (January-March 2021 and Projection for April-July 2021). The subsequent update does not 
provide data on children’s malnutrition. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 9 of 38 
 
likely to be strained in a situation where bilateral resources are at risk of diversion to respond to the forced displacement 
crisis emerging in Europe. The war overseas has already led to the increased costs of electricity and transportation in 
Somalia due to global fuel price increases, which has a disproportionate impact on poor small-scale farmers and 
pastoralists. The country is dependent on wheat from Ukraine and will face the immediate consequences of the conflict. 
In the period from 2018 to 2020 Ukrainian supplies accounted for 31 percent of total wheat imports. Switching to 
alternative sources in the short term is likely to be difficult and lead to supply shortages, and the production and supply 
chain impact of the conflict is expected to put further upward pressure on food prices. The associated risks of further 
inflation in the short to medium terms also threatens the food security of millions across the country. 
 
8. 
The proposed AF would form part of the broader World Bank support to the FGS response to the escalating 
drought and food insecurity. Several existing operations are now reallocating financing to this end. The Somalia Crisis 
Recovery Project (SCRP, P173315) which builds resilience to recurrent natural disasters and supports livelihoods recovery 
will now scale up partnership arrangements with UN agencies and civil society consortiums to provide rapid assistance. 
The Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) of the Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II (SURP II, 
P178887) will be triggered to support infrastructure and services in selected cities experiencing a large inflow of IDP. 
Similarly, the Water for Agropastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (WAPR or “Biyoole”, P167826) which delivers 
improved water and agriculture services will fast track rehabilitation of boreholes in several areas affected by the 
drought. Around US$45 million is being remobilized under these three projects, which taken together with the proposed 
AF, amounts to an overall World Bank supported drought response of US$195 million. 
 
C. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
9. 
Somalia established its first national safety net program – Baxnaano6 – under the leadership of the Ministry of 
Labor and Social Affairs (MoLSA) in 2019 with the support of the parent Project.  Baxnaano is primarily an unconditional 
cash transfer program which currently reaches 200,000 chronically poor and vulnerable households (approximately 1.2 
million individuals) with children aged under five years in 21 districts across all FMS and Somaliland. The parent Project, 
together with the World Bank’s complementary advisory services and analytics (ASA) and in collaboration with the World 
Food Programme (WFP) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), has been supporting MoLSA to build internal 
capacity and develop its own delivery systems, to enable transitioning to direct implementation by MoLSA.  Baxnaano is 
gradually being recognized as a national safety net delivery platform that facilitates coordination and collaboration with 
humanitarian programs, with a vision to gradually transition from a humanitarian mode of operation and take on a more 
longer-term programmatic developmental focus. 
 
10. 
The complementary Shock Responsive Safety Net for Locust Response Project (SNLRP) (P174065)7 furthermore 
used the Baxnaano platform to deliver emergency cash transfers (ECT) to 100,000 households affected by locust 
infestation in 45 districts for a six-month period in 2021 (SNLRP Phase I). Around 33,000 of these households were 
already receiving regular cash transfers under the program, while the majority were new recipients. This operation also 
benefitted from an AF (P176369) which will now expand ECT coverage to another 160,000 households on a short-term 
basis (SNLRP Phase II) of whom about 17,000 are regular cash transfer recipients. 
 
 
6 The program name Baxnaano means “uplifting” in Somali. 
 
7 The SNLRP was financed under the Emergency Locust Response Program Phase (P173702), a Multiphase Programmatic Approach to respond to 
the threat posed by the 2020-21 desert locust plague and to strengthen systems for preparedness. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 10 of 38 
 
11. 
Supported by SNHCP and SNLRP, Baxnaano has rapidly evolved into an adaptive safety net program with two 
windows. “Baxnaano-regular” provides long-term human capital linked basic transfers, while “Baxnaano-shock-
response” provides short-term transfers in the form of top-ups to “Baxnaano-regular” beneficiaries and ECT to 
households not enrolled in “Baxnaano-regular”. Table 1 summarizes the overall World Bank financing supporting 
Baxnaano, which totals US$290 million, of which US$268 million (92 percent) is allocated for cash transfers including 
delivery costs. The table also shows the number of beneficiaries targeted, transfer amounts per household financed by 
different operations and Baxnaano program widows. 
 
Table 1: Household Targeted and Benefits Provided by World Bank financed Projects and Baxnaano Program Window 
Project 
Window 
Households enrolled in “Baxnaano-regular” 
Households not enrolled 
in “Baxnaano-regular” 
Coverage Target 
(households) 
Basic Transfer 
(per month) 
Shock-Responsive 
Transfer (per month) 
ECT 
(per month) 
SNHCP 
(US$65 million) 
Regular 
US$20 
- 
- 
200,000 
SNHCP AF 
(US$110 million) 
Regular / 
Shock-Response 
US$20 
US$40 (for 6 months) 
- 
SNLRP 
(US$40 million) 
Shock-Response 
- 
US$40 (for 6 months) 
US$60 (for 6 months) 
100,000 
SNLRP AF 
(US$75 million) 
Shock-Response 
- 
US$40 (for 6 months) 
US$60 (for 6 months) 
160,000 
 
12. 
Prior to the establishment of a formal safety net program, the poor and vulnerable relied on informal kinship-
based support and remittances, as well as humanitarian aid to meet emergency needs. Informal networks usually 
benefit urban households and tend to be concentrated within particular clans, lineages, and extended families, and often 
do not reach the neediest, including minority and marginalized groups. Humanitarian assistance, while critical in saving 
lives and filling urgent income and livelihoods needs in the short-term, does not provide a stable and predictable safety 
net system to systematically address vulnerabilities and strengthen household resilience to shocks and invest in human 
capital. Furthermore, these programs operate outside the government system and lack government leadership in actual 
service delivery, which is essential in establishing a social contract between citizens and the state. 
 
13. 
In recognition of this gap in government services there has been a gradual convergence in strategies and 
interventions among humanitarian and development agencies in recent years. To this end, the consortium of partners 
has participated in the development of the Somalia Social Protection Policy (2019) and the complementary Social 
Protection Policy Implementation Framework (2020), which frame the strategic agenda and roadmap to realize the FGS 
vision for the sector. A National Social Protection Steering Committee (NSPSC), chaired by the Office of the Prime 
Minister, and a government and development partner Social Protection Working Group (SPWG), led by MoLSA and 
established with the support of the parent Project, have been set up to respectively provide strategic policy guidance 
and ensure coordination across interventions. The Somalia Donor Working Group (SDWG) provides a regular platform 
for donors’ policy dialogue and a means to ensure technical coherence in the sector, while the Cash Working Group 
(CWG) provides another forum for the coordination of cash-based interventions specifically. Efforts are also underway 
to further refine program policy and define roles and responsibilities of the FGS, represented by MoLSA, and the FMS. 
 
14. 
In the three years since its inception, Baxnaano has gained significant visibility as the country’s flagship cash 
transfer program, with its mandate to not only protect poor and vulnerable populations from shocks, but to strengthen 
their resilience for medium-term recovery and long-term development. Various development partners are currently 
exploring the potential to harmonize their interventions with the program’s design and delivery mechanism, especially 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 11 of 38 
 
with regards to aligning with Baxnaano’s shock-responsive parameters for crisis response as well as coordinating and/or 
consolidating household targeting mechanisms. 
 
D. Project Status 
 
15. 
Progress towards Achievement of the PDO and Overall Implementation Progress have both been rated 
“satisfactory” for more than twelve consecutive months.8 The parent Project comprises three components: (i) nutrition-
linked unconditional cash transfers, (ii) delivery systems and institutional capacity building, and (iii) project management, 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and knowledge management.  As of May 30, 2022, disbursement under the parent 
Project is at 88 percent (of which the full commitment under Component 1 has been disbursed) and disbursement under 
the first AF is at 29 percent.   There are no outstanding audit reports, and all legal covenants are complied with. 
 
16. 
Component 1 (Nutrition-linked Unconditional Cash Transfers) finances the transfers paid under the Baxnaano 
program to strengthen household resilience, address negative coping mechanisms, and promote human capital 
investments via links to nutrition services. It is implemented under an Agreement for Delivery of Outputs between 
MoLSA and WFP. Beneficiaries are entitled to a regular transfer of US$20 monthly (paid quarterly) for a period of three 
years, with mothers or female caregivers of children being direct recipients of the cash transfer. Program re-enrollment 
beyond this period would be contingent on an eligibility recertification process. Beneficiaries may also be eligible to 
receive US$40 monthly (paid quarterly) for a period of six months, in case of the onset of a shock which can threaten to 
exacerbate their poverty and vulnerability. Although it faced a slow start-up, “Baxnaano-regular” has now achieved 99 
percent coverage of its beneficiary target of 200,000 households, with 94 percent of this caseload having received their 
entitlements for over a year (five quarters). With the first year’s payments having been covered by the parent Project, 
benefits from the second year of program participation are in the process of being paid under the first AF. As part of its 
immediate efforts to leverage Baxnaano’s shock-responsive features to address the prevailing drought crisis, MoLSA has 
frontloaded the budget of the third year of regular program participation into immediate shock-responsive top-ups to 
participants. These benefits will be paid out for a period of six months until September 2022. This would mean that the 
Component allocation under the first AF would be fully disbursed by the end of 2022. 
 
17. 
Component 2 (Delivery Systems and Institutional Capacity Building) finances institutional strengthening of 
MoLSA to gradually take on full implementation and management responsibilities for Baxnaano and lay the foundation 
for a comprehensive safety net system. It is implemented under an Agreement for Delivery of Outputs between MoLSA 
and UNICEF. The development of a unified social registry (USR, see Figure 1), Baxnaano management information system 
(MIS), and the overall delivery mechanism, which are the key building blocks of such a system, are well advanced. 
Specifically, core USR software modules (i.e. enumerator management, registration, grievance management, reporting, 
etc.) have been developed and are being tested. The welfare ranking module is currently under development following 
the recent finalization of the welfare scoring methodology resulting from extensive consultations. Linkages to external 
databases will be made once these come online – most importantly the Baxnaano MIS and the national identification 
database. The USR operations manual development is nearing completion, necessary equipment to host the USR data 
has been procured, and the physical facility where the USR data center will be housed has been identified. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 Based on Implementation Status & Results (ISR) Reports archived on (i) December 22, 2020 (seq. no. 3), (ii) June 24, 2021 (seq. no. 4), and January 
14, 2022 (seq. no. 5). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 12 of 38 
 
Figure 1: USR Architecture and Operational Functions 
 
 
18. 
Component 3 (Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Management) finances the 
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within MoLSA and helps strengthen horizontal coordination with other line 
ministries as well as between FGS and FMS. The PIU is fully established with liaison officers at the FMS level, and M&E 
efforts have been enhanced under arrangements with a third-party monitoring (TPM) agency. Furthermore, the SPWG 
chaired by MoLSA has been established, with representation from the FMS, relevant ministries and development 
partners. This platform ensures coordination among stakeholders and provides strategic guidance on sectoral policies 
and programs. 
 
19. 
Project management has consistently been satisfactory. There are no significant concerns regarding fiduciary 
functions, with financial reporting submitted timely and all major contracts having been signed. All necessary 
environmental and social instruments are in place and implementation quality has benefitted from a robust grievance 
redress mechanism (GRM) comprising WFP’s complaints and feedback mechanism (CFM) at the community level and a 
toll-free call center established by MoLSA. Coupled with TPM arrangements, these avenues for citizen engagement have 
allowed the parent Project to incorporate lessons from community feedback on Baxnaano. There have been no reports 
of major incidents of gender-based violence (GBV), sexual exploitation and abuse / sexual harassment (SEA/SH), 
occupational health and safety, among others, which have been assessed to pose serious risks. Maintenance of 
environmental and social standards (ESS) has thus been satisfactory. 
 
E. Rationale for Additional Financing 
 
20. 
The proposed AF will support the continuation of cash transfers to existing beneficiaries, scale up coverage in 
response to the prevailing drought and enhance the shock-responsiveness of the safety net delivery system. The aim 
of the Project is to help the FGS develop and deliver a long-term safety net program that provides sustained and 
predictable income support to the poor and vulnerable population, strengthens resilience to climate shocks, and 
contributes to building their human capital. The proposed AF is expected continue contributing to building trust and 
confidence in the government by its citizens. According to the current Baxnaano design, beneficiaries are entitled to cash 
assistance for three years before they are reassessed for continued eligibility. The parent Project and its first AF provided 
funds to ensure coverage of the current beneficiaries through the three years of entitlement (up to December 2023). The 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 13 of 38 
 
proposed AF will cover the financing gap of approximately US$42 million created under the first AF which has pivoted to 
address the drought crisis immediately by frontloading its cash transfer allocation for regular transfers towards shock-
responsive top-ups. Given the pressing needs of the poor and vulnerable population which are further exacerbated by 
the drought, cash transfers would need to be scaled-up to other vulnerable populations. The proposed AF will support a 
15 percent9 scale up of “Baxnaano-regular” coverage as well as deliver temporary ECT to drought-affected populations 
who are not enrolled in the “Baxnaano-regular”. The Project is supporting the development of a government-led safety 
net delivery system including a the USR which is expected to enable rapid identification of the poor and vulnerable 
especially during times of crisis. The proposed AF will test the functionality of this newly developed social registry for the 
registration and identification of beneficiaries to take part in the scale up of the program. 
 
21. 
The drought crisis now affecting Somalia poses food security risks to 6 million people.  In the absence of 
immediately available financial resources to address the growing vulnerability, FGS has authorized the payment of 
emergency top-ups to its existing beneficiaries who were selected on the basis of their existing poverty and vulnerability 
profiles and overlap with the current drought impacted locations10. This involved frontloading regular benefits 
programmed for a third year of program participation, under the first AF, towards emergency benefits during the period 
from April to September 2022 concurrently with the delivery schedule of its regular payments. Accordingly, the parent 
Project would face a financing gap for a third year of regular transfers to its core beneficiary cohort, for whom three years 
of payments were provisioned by program policy and under the existing World Bank support. In addition, the 
depreciation of Special Drawing Rights (SDR) between the time the parent Project and the first AF were approved have 
resulted in a loss in the nominal transfer value available to beneficiaries. The proposed AF would thus bridge the gap 
created by the parent Project addressing the drought crisis for a segment of the affected population, as well as by the 
exchange rate loss. 
 
22. 
The severity and extent of the drought crisis necessitates the scale up of income support even to households 
not participating or eligible for the regular Baxnaano, following the model established under the SNLRP. Under this 
Project, households not having children under five years of age were also eligible based on the severity of the impact of 
the locust plague on their communities. All non-Baxnaano households were provided US$60 per month for a six-month 
period (transferred quarterly). Given that households having experienced the fallout of the locust plague are still residing 
in areas where the drought has an overlapping impact, and that there are limited resources reaching such areas, a 
provision to address this segment of the population is essential. The proposed AF is in a position to rapidly roll out ECT in 
such locations as a large base of beneficiaries have already been identified under SNLRP and all have mobile money 
accounts for easy access to funds. 
 
23. 
FGS has also expressed its interest in scaling-up regular Baxnaano coverage even if with a modest start, with 
the understanding that a three-year program duration for a new cohort may not be fully covered under the proposed 
AF. Transfers of benefits to a new cohort of vulnerable households who do not currently participate in the program would 
support efforts to enhance resilience.  With no domestic revenue sources or other development assistance committed 
towards Baxnaano at this time, the World Bank’s financing remains invaluable not only for the cash transfers themselves, 
but also due to continued investments in developing Baxnaano delivery systems beyond those of WFP’s SCOPE platform 
(the agency’s proprietary beneficiary and benefits management system). Accordingly, FGS would test key delivery 
systems that are in an advanced stage of development (under Component 2 of the parent Project and supported by the 
 
9 FGS social protection policy calls for expanded safety net coverage of the poor and vulnerable to achieve progress in reducing poverty and building 
resilience. However, for fiscal and sustainability considerations, the coverage expansion would need to be made gradually. 
 
10 WFP analysis indicates a 95 percent overlap between Baxnaano locations and those categorized in IPC Phase 3 (Crisis) or above. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 14 of 38 
 
World Bank’s complementary ASA), specifically the poverty-based targeting methodology and the registration and 
household welfare ranking mechanism of the social registry. This effort would provide lessons on operational challenges 
as well as take a step towards the planned transition from the current WFP partnership model to a modality where MoLSA 
eventually administers Baxnaano using country systems for beneficiary identification, data management, payments, 
grievance redress, etc. 
 
24. 
The expansion in Baxnaano’s scope by (i) maintaining transfers for its current caseload of Baxnaano-regular 
beneficiaries, (ii) enabling ECT to drought-affected households not participating in Baxnaano-regular on a temporary 
basis, and (iii) scaling-up Baxnaano-regular to new households, would further consolidate the program’s position in 
the country as a central platform for social assistance.  Since inception, Baxnaano has been critical in protecting 
households’ food security and human capital, as well as in strengthening resilience against shocks. In times of crisis, 
households adopt negative coping mechanisms to meet short-term needs which result in adverse long-term effects 
deepening the challenges of breaking the intergenerational cycle of poverty.  Interruptions in the delivery of cash 
transfers, as well as the inadequacy of benefits, thus pose a risk of households regressing into deeper food insecurity 
given the impacts of multidimensional shocks on the country. The existing implementation arrangements have had two 
and a half years of operational experience, and delivery of social assistance to populations in urgent need could be 
provided rapidly with minimal logistical preparation as a large segment is already pre-identified.  The small scale up to 
assess transitional plans would likewise follow procedures which have already served around 410,000 households across 
the two sets of World Bank supported projects financing cash transfers. 
 
25. 
The 2022 Somalia Humanitarian Response Plan seeks US$1.5 billion in financing, of which only 4.4 percent is 
funded till date, and the proposed AF will contribute towards reducing the funding gap for drought response. With low 
domestic revenues and significant gap in international financing to support food insecurity, especially in the current 
global emergencies and competing demands for crisis response, the World Bank’s engagement will be essential in 
ensuring the poor and vulnerable are protected during this period where they are faced with difficulties in meeting basic 
needs. While FGS and humanitarian agencies are best positioned to address market and supply issues, the World Bank 
has a comparative advantage in addressing the demand-side pressures by financing transfers and supporting the 
refinement of the service delivery process. This will also help to ease the financial burden on the humanitarian system, 
which is already struggling to respond to the back-to-back and concurrent shocks of the last few years. 
 
26. 
The proposed AF will continue to provide institutional continuity in a highly volatile situation. The Project 
already operates in the context of several climatic, epidemiological and biological shocks, and would need to take 
cognizance of the prevailing political situation. The continuity of a government-led social assistance program will be 
critical in ensuring public confidence in institutions at a time where responses to multiple natural disasters can be 
undermined by civil unrest and political uncertainties. Uninterrupted delivery of cash transfers to shock-affected 
communities, as well as a scale up of transfers to new locations, would signal the FGS commitment to improving the lives 
of the poor and vulnerable and uphold the principles enshrined in its development strategies and policies. The proposed 
AF would thus ensure that institutional resilience is maintained in spite of the multiple crises and fragile context persisting 
in Somalia. 
 
F. Strategic Relevance 
 
27. 
Social protection continues to be a critical element in the FGS fight against poverty and efforts to promote 
prosperity. The parent Project, its first AF, and the proposed second AF, are all aligned directly with FGS’ national strategy 
and policy. The Ninth National Development Plan (NDP 9) (2020–2024) dedicates Pillar 4 to social development, which 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 15 of 38 
 
entails “strategies and interventions that improve access by Somali citizens to health, education and other essential 
services, including social protection systems in times of extreme need”. More specifically, the Somalia Social Protection 
Policy (2019) defines social protection as “government-led policies and programs, which address predictable needs 
throughout the life cycle in order to protect all groups, and particularly the poor and vulnerable, against shocks, help 
them to manage risks, and provide them with opportunities to overcome poverty, vulnerability, and exclusion”. The 
complementary Social Protection Policy Implementation Framework (2019) is structured around seven policy priorities, 
including “unconditional assistance for the poorest and neediest,” and “foundational systems and capabilities” both of 
which are directly supported by Project investments in cash transfers and delivery mechanisms. 
 
28. 
The parent Project, its active and proposed AFs, continue to support the World Bank’s developmental vision for 
Somalia and the Africa region more broadly. The World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the 
Republic of Somalia (FY19–22), as one of its four focus areas, supports strengthening institutions to deliver services and 
highlights the World Bank’s intent to build on existing technologies and programs to develop a shock-responsive safety 
net system and thereby test a new model of state-facilitated resilience-building.11 Specifically, objective 1.3 aims to 
“improve delivery systems for inclusive social services” towards which the Project makes direct investments. In this 
regard, building on technologies such as mobile money, digital identification systems, and a single registry are 
highlighted, alongside the need to bridge humanitarian and development interventions. Furthermore, the World Bank 
Group’s Africa Regional Strategy (2019–2023) envisages investing in people and supporting climate change mitigation 
and adaptation, both of which are directed financed via shock-responsive cash transfers to promote the uptake of 
nutrition services. The proposed AF also enhances the Project’s continued contribution to results expected under the 
Africa Human Capital Plan (2019), which aims to increase social protection coverage of the poorest quintile in Low Income 
Countries (LIC) to 30 percent by 2023. 
 
29. 
At a global level the World Bank Group’s Strategy for FCV (2020–2025), which has established a framework for 
such settings, commits to remaining engaged during situations of crisis. This entails building resilience, protecting 
essential institutions, and delivering critical services – actions which the proposed AF directly address and promote. 
Moreover, the Strategy recognizes the need to build partnerships with humanitarian actors and has cited the Project’s 
collaboration with WFP and UNICEF as good practice examples as part of its Famine Action Mechanism (FAM), which 
provides a model for sharing information on food insecurity situations and mobilizing anticipatory action before the onset 
of major shocks. 
 
II. DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
A. Overview 
 
30. 
The Baxnaano program aims to provide a basic level of income support and link beneficiaries to complementary 
nutrition services for three years. This duration is considered essential in building human capital via predictable transfers 
and accompanying measures, and the proposed AF would help preserve the gains attained under the Project which now 
face risks of reversal as a result of the prevailing drought crisis. The proposed AF would support additional households to 
cope with food insecurity by bringing selected locations within its ambit while providing ECT to selected households 
 
11 The CPF FY19-22 (Report No. 12473-SO) was discussed by the Board of Executive Directors on August 29, 2018. The Somalia Performance Learning 
Review is under preparation, aiming to adjust the CPF framework to enhance support for institution building and service delivery critical to 
strengthening the social contract, and supporting resilient, and inclusive recovery from the triple crisis, including through a deeper focus on human 
capital. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 16 of 38 
 
impacted by the drought crisis and not enrolled in the regular Baxnaano program. Furthermore, it would ensure sufficient 
time is provided to develop and test the service delivery systems and policies necessary for MoLSA to gradually take on 
greater implementation responsibilities for Baxnaano.  
 
31. 
Recent analysis of Project targeted districts and those currently classified as IPC3+ shows significant overlap. 
This suggests the need to carry out a rapid vertical scale up to protect the consumption patterns of households by bridging 
consumption deficits caused by the drought and the rise in basic commodity prices. If support is not provided it will 
threaten immediate food security, and concurrently undermine gains made under the Project. Comparison of the most 
recent IPC data with the analysis from February 2022 shows a rapidly deteriorating situation across SNLRP coverage areas. 
SNLRP Phase I beneficiary households have already received their due ECT within December 2021 and are highly 
vulnerable to the drought and growing food insecurity. Table 2 illustrates the geographical overlap between SNHCP and 
SNLRP locations and IPC3+ areas based on the most recent IPC data. 
 
Table 2: Mapping of SNHCP and SNLRP locations in IPC3+ in 2022 
 
SNHCP Districts 
SNLRP (Phase I) Districts 
SNLRP (Phase II) Districts 
February 2022 
95 percent 
76 percent 
71 percent 
April 2022 
95 percent 
97 percent 
97 percent 
Change  
- 
21 percentage points 
26 percentage points 
 
32. 
The proposed AF would support the continued operation of the Baxnaano program, expand coverage and 
introduce a new Component to support the development of the delivery system. No changes will be made to the PDO 
or the implementation arrangements. Changes are only being made to the (i) components, costs and scope of activities, 
(ii) indicators and selected results targets, and (iii) closing date. The existing contract between MoLSA and WFP would be 
amended to ensure extension of the collaboration for additional activities. The Project Operations Manual (POM) has 
already been updated to incorporate relevant provisions and TPM arrangements would similarly be adjusted within three 
months of effectiveness of the proposed AF. MoLSA will lead communication and dialogue with the FMS which would be 
particularly critical in ensuring transparency around the geographic targeting process. MoLSA would also chair periodic 
progress review meetings with WFP and UNICEF, with the participation of the World Bank, and ensure continuous 
government-led dialogue on specific thematic areas (i.e. USR, targeting, MIS, etc.) with the participation of relevant 
agencies and consultants for continuous feedback from implementation experiences. 
 
B. Components and Costs 
 
33. 
The proposed AF will finance Component 1 and the new Component 4. Table 3 below summarizes the overall 
Project cost distribution. Together with the parent Project and first AF, the amount allocated for cash transfers including 
delivery costs (i.e. Component 1) would represent 94 percent of the total Project cost. 
 
Table 3: Project Cost by Component and Financing Source 
Component 
IDA Commitment (US$ million equivalent) 
Parent Project 
First AF 
Proposed AF 
Total 
1. 
Nutrition-Linked Unconditional Cash 
Transfers 
53 
108 
138 
299 
2. 
Delivery Systems and Institutional Capacity 
Building 
6 
- 
- 
6 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 17 of 38 
 
Component 
IDA Commitment (US$ million equivalent) 
Parent Project 
First AF 
Proposed AF 
Total 
3. 
Project Management, M&E, and Knowledge 
Management 
6 
2 
- 
8 
4. 
Household Registration in the USR 
- 
- 
5 
5 
 
65 
110 
143 
318 
 
34. 
Component 1: Nutrition-linked Unconditional Cash Transfers (US$138 million equivalent under the proposed 
AF). This will support the Baxnaano program’s continuity for existing beneficiaries, responsiveness to the ongoing 
drought, as well as introduce a modest expansion (15 percent) of the regular Baxnaano program. The distribution of 
beneficiaries and associated benefits would be as follows: 
 
(a) The current cohort of 200,000 beneficiary households are entitled to three years of benefits. The frontloading 
arrangement under the first AF through which these households would receive shock-responsive top-ups for a six-
month period (US$40 per household monthly) has resulted in a funding gap equivalent to twelve months of 
coverage, and an exchange rate loss has also diminished the available duration by approximately a quarter. The 
proposed AF would sustain regular transfers (US$20 per household monthly) for up to fifteen months to ensure 
original beneficiary cohort receive their full entitlements. 
 
(b) Around 155,000 households would receive six months of ECT (US$60 per household monthly) to cope with the 
current drought crisis. These would include around 69,000 households from locust-affected areas who received 
benefits under SNLRP Phase I and around 86,000 new households to be identified from areas hard hit by the 
drought. All these households are not currently eligible for Baxnaano-regular. 
 
(c) Around 20,000 new beneficiary households would be enrolled in Baxnaano-regular from areas of high food 
insecurity and acute malnutrition. Regular transfers for up to twelve months would be provisioned to integrate 
these households into the program with links to nutrition services. 
 
35. 
Targeting of the new “Baxnaano-shock-response” beneficiaries will follow the approach established under the 
parent Project with adjustments to the drought situation.  Selection of targeted districts will be based on the established 
district distress index12 which factors trends in malnutrition prevalence and food insecurity over the last three years. This 
data would be cross-checked with districts hit hardest by the ongoing drought (i.e. with a high concentration of IPC3+ 
cases). The allocation of the caseload will take into consideration the district population and/or the expected number of 
people in IPC3+.  Within the selected districts, villages will be prioritized based on the concentration of IPC3+ cases and 
in consultation with the district authorities. The selected districts or villages may be from among those already 
participating receiving benefits under the SNHCP or SNLRP, in which case there will be an enrolment of additional 
households beyond the current caseload. Household selection in eligible villages will follow the approach currently 
practiced by the Baxnaano-regular program, i.e. eligible households will be identified through a community-based 
targeting (CBT) process whereby community selection committees (CSC), with support from implementing partners, 
identify the poorest households as perceived by the community, but without restricting eligibility to households with 
children under five years of age. In case of oversubscription, priority will be given to households who were specifically 
 
12 All districts across all Somalia’s FMS and Somaliland are included in the distress index rating 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 18 of 38 
 
affected by the drought, those with persons-with-disabilities, and those with children under five years old.13 Lists of 
eligible households produced by the CBT process will be publicly displayed to ensure transparency and the validity of the 
list may be challenged through the GRM. 
 
36. 
The expanded coverage of Baxnaano-regular, while limited, provides an opportunity to test and operationalize 
key delivery systems developed under Component 2. The recently adopted Baxnaano targeting approach aims to 
improve targeting outcomes based on implementation experience and findings from a targeting evaluation and TPM 
reports. The revised approach relies on multiple techniques to identify poor and vulnerable households: (i) geographic 
targeting at the district level using the distress index that relies on the most recent data on district-level malnutrition and 
food insecurity, (ii) geographic targeting of sub-district localities based on village welfare indicators,14 (iii) household-level 
targeting in selected areas based on household welfare scores generated by the USR, and (iv) CBT validation, used to 
complement poverty-focused targeting on the basis of the welfare score.15  This activity will provide an opportunity to 
test two key modules and business processes of the USR, namely, the registration module and the household welfare 
ranking module. 
 
37. 
To respond to the high levels of urban poverty, districts within Banadir Regional Administration (BRA) will be 
prioritized (among comparable districts)16 for the expansion of Baxnaano-regular. In keeping with the new Baxnaano 
targeting methodology, selection of sub-districts/communities within the eligible districts will be based on area welfare 
rankings that factor community characteristics such as population size, availability and quality of infrastructure, access 
to markets and access to services. This data will be collected through a community assessment survey and in consultation 
with districts authorities, but whenever possible, readily available data on community characteristics will be used. Within 
the chosen localities, household registration of all households interested in applying for Baxnaano benefits will be 
conducted and the 30,000 household with the lowest households’ welfare score will be admitted into the Baxnaano 
program, following their validation by the CSC. The household welfare score will be based on an empirically derived 
formula and systematically collected households’ data. Third-party monitoring of the registration process and the GRM 
will further ensure the accuracy of the targeting performance. 
 
38. 
Component 2: Delivery Systems and Institutional Capacity Building: No change will be made. 
 
39. 
Component 3: Project Management, M&E, and Knowledge Management: No change will be made. 
 
40. 
Component 4: Household Registration in the USR (US$5 million equivalent under the proposed AF): This new 
Component will contribute to the expansion of the USR by registering households not yet included in the database using 
its common registration form (CRF). It would strengthen the safety net system preparedness to respond to impacts of 
 
 
13 Presence of children under five years of age will only be a prioritization criterion in cases of oversubscription but not an ex-ante exclusion criterion. 
 
14 The methodology for village welfare scoring remains to be finalized, but will involve aggregation of empirical information of village-level indicators 
such as population, availability and condition of key services, infrastructure, etc. Implementation of village welfare scoring will rely on available data 
(e.g. with humanitarian organizations or government) but may require additional data collection. 
 
15 Community validation gives communities a clearly defined formal role in eligibility decisions, albeit with adequate controls to prevent elite 
capture, exclusion, corruption, etc. The implementation of community validation will improve on the community based-targeting practices currently 
used by Baxnaano. 
 
16 Further, expansion of Baxnaano coverage in anticipation of a truly national coverage of the full-fledged Baxnaano program will offer MoLSA an 
invaluable learning opportunity. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 19 of 38 
 
future climate shocks and other emergencies, as well as improve coordination across response interventions, including 
humanitarian assistance. It is estimated that around 200,000 households’ data may be populated, which combined with 
the ongoing registration under SNLRP would expand the database to around 450,000 households. As such, activities will 
complement the delivery systems building efforts under Component 2 which solely supports the USR establishment from 
policy, institutional, procedural, technical and infrastructural perspectives. WFP would facilitate USR registration building 
on already established data protection arrangements. The registration of households will be conducted via a standalone 
data collection exercise undertaken by a firm contracted by WFP, in close coordination with MoLSA and UNICEF. Consent 
will be obtained from participating households for registration, while privacy and security of personal data collected will 
be ensured under WFP’s existing policies, procedures, arrangements and systems. WFP will arrange to transfer household 
data to the USR once FGS approves the forthcoming Data Protection Framework/Act (supported by the World Bank under 
the Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship through Digital Uplift Project (SCALED-UP, 
P168115), as per agreements between MoLSA and WFP under existing contracts under the parent Project and SNLRP. 
 
C. Results 
 
41. 
The PDO will remain unchanged. However, targets for two results indicators will be revised upwards due to the 
expansion of the Baxnaano program and two new intermediary indicators will be introduced. The specific changes are: 
 
(a) The target for PDO indicator “beneficiaries of social safety net programs” will be 2,250,000 (up from 1,200,000). 
 
➢ The target for the sub-indicator “beneficiaries of social safety net programs (female)” will be 1,125,000 (up 
from 600,000). 
 
(b) The intermediate indicator “direct beneficiary households of cash transfers (equivalent to direct women 
recipients)” will be revised as “households receiving cash transfers” with a target of 375,000 (up from 200,000). 
 
➢ The sub-indicator “households receiving shock-responsive benefits to cope with an adverse climatic event” 
will be added, with a target of 338,000. This would assess responsiveness to the drought. 
 
(c) The intermediate indicator “women directly receiving cash transfers” will be added, with a target of 85 percent. 
This would assess female-focused coverage under Component 1. 
 
(d) The intermediate indicator “households registered in the USR” will be added, with a target of 200,000. This would 
assess delivery system preparedness under Component 4. 
 
D. Closing Date 
 
42. 
The closing date of the parent Project and first AF would be extended by sixteen months to December 31, 2024, 
to align with that of the proposed second AF. This would facilitate the implementation of Components 1 and 4. Under 
Component 1, cash transfers to newly enrolled beneficiaries of the Baxnaano-regular program are expended to be 
provided for an eighteen-month period. Their participation in the program is not expected to commence till early to mid-
2023 given the lead time involved in using the CRF of the USR and newly endorsed targeting methodology to identify and 
enroll new beneficiaries. The extended overall Project period would thus assure the intended duration of benefits of the 
new beneficiary cohort. In addition, activities under Component 4, which strive to further develop Baxnaano’s adaptive 
capacity, would require a reasonable period to allow population of the database. These would entail new contractual 
arrangements under WFP, obtaining household consent for registration, face-to-face data collection, data transfer from 
WFP to the USR, among others. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 20 of 38 
 
III. KEY RISKS 
 
43. 
The overall risk rating for the proposed AF is substantial. Somalia’s FCV status with a fluid political scenario and 
ongoing insecurity, compounded by a lack of government presence in parts of the country, means that political and 
governance risks remain high. The macroeconomic risk has been raised from substantial to high given the heightened 
fragility on account of the war in Ukraine. Fiduciary risks continue to be high, as the country’s public financial 
management and procurement legal frameworks are still weak, fragmented, and inadequate. Risks relating to sector 
strategies and policies, and institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability, remain substantial, while 
environmental and social risks are lowered from substantial to moderate on aggregate. Risks related to the technical 
design of the Project and on account of stakeholders both remain moderate, as the objective and transparent targeting 
approach and implementation procedures under the parent Project are working well, the implementation capacity of 
MoLSA is growing, and coordination mechanisms are functioning satisfactorily. All existing risk mitigation measures 
identified under the parent Project will continue to be implemented, and new mitigation measures will be applied to 
emerging risks identified during implementation. 
 
44. 
Political and governance risks remain high. Such risks had intensified over the past year with the protracted 
elections across the FMS, and militant strikes on government and electoral targets during a period of political uncertainty. 
Complex relationship between the FGS, FMS and Somaliland, lack of government presence in parts of the country, a 
volatile security situation, and the ongoing anti-terror campaign can restrict access to project sites for cash delivery 
and/or monitoring of implementation. The election process has now concluded with a peaceful transfer of power, and 
transitional plans from international to national security arrangements are being put into action and are expected to 
bring relative improvement. Mitigating measures will include ongoing engagement with UN agencies, NGOs, and private 
sector entities who already have good working relationships with the FGS, FMS, and communities through humanitarian 
interventions. The proposed AF also provides an operational platform for promoting the dialogue between FGS and FMS 
around protecting poor and vulnerable citizens and building bridges for collaboration in service delivery. 
 
45. 
The macroeconomic risk is now considered high as Somalia remains fiscally fragile, with a weak revenue base, 
continually battered by overlapping and persistent crises. This situation has been worsened due to Somalia’s significant 
reliance on wheat imports from Ukraine where the ongoing conflict has disrupted production and supply chains. Coupled 
with the rapidly increasing basic food prices, rising fuel prices globally have further compounded inflationary impacts in 
the country with fertilizer and transport costs also moving upwards. These inflationary impacts could result in the loss of 
purchasing power of cash transfers and further threaten food security of millions across the country. Baxnaano will 
continue to rely on WFP and other partners to continuously assess market conditions to determine how the program can 
adjust to respond effectively. 
 
46. 
The fiduciary risk for the Project remains high. This is largely attributable to weak and evolving rudimentary funds 
flow and banking systems particularly at the implementation level, characterized by potential money laundering and 
terrorist financing (ML/TF) risks; inadequate public financial management and cash transfer management capacities at 
the implementing agency and community level to spend and account for the funds correctly and timely; and limited 
access to Project sites at the local level due to security constraints. Risk mitigation measures include strengthening 
beneficiary identification and enrolment processes using WFP’s SCOPE platform; strengthening existing framework 
agreements with payment service providers to facilitate payment delivery, in particular measures to minimize liquidity 
challenges; TPM arrangements complemented by field-based monitors; and agreement with MoLSA and WFP to ensure 
utilization of banking institutions supervised by recognized regimes. These risk mitigation measures will be further 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 21 of 38 
 
strengthened with the aim of strengthening country institutional capacities, systems, policies and procedures, with the 
support of dedicated and qualified resources for procurement and financial management at MoLSA. 
 
47. 
Risks arising from sector strategies and policies remain substantial in the context of the political uncertainties. 
FGS is committed to establishing an effective national social protection system, as elaborated in its high level strategic 
and policy documents, however, changes in government leadership and capacity constraints at all levels can risk slowing 
down progress on the sectoral agenda. In this regard, the ongoing World Bank ASA has been critical in ensuring that FGS 
receives just-in-time advisory support in the formulation of broader strategy and policy, as well as on operational matters 
which impact Project performance and outcomes, such as a new targeting strategy to be utilized by Baxnaano – which 
remains a central tool for the overall sector strategy in its poverty alleviation efforts. 
 
48. 
Similarly, risks arising from institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability remain substantial as 
changes in leadership can impact the implementation momentum achieved till date. At the policy level the NSPSC and 
SPWG, chaired by the Office of the Prime Minister and MoLSA respectively, are expected to serve as mitigating measures 
to smoothen inter-governmental coordination and with development partners. The SPWG has been convening at regular 
intervals, however the NSPSC has not been able to convene since its establishment in 2020. At an implementation level, 
MoLSA’s own capacity to implement the Project has grown with its partnerships with WFP and UNICEF, as well as close 
technical support from the World Bank over the past three years. Technical collaboration with these agencies and the 
World Bank extends beyond the scope of the Project, and efforts to build capacity in terms of both human and 
technological resources are therefore holistic and not only Project focused, providing an additional layer of mitigation to 
implementation and sustainability risks. 
 
49. 
Other risks in Somalia include conflict and insecurity risks, which continue to be substantial across the country 
and high in parts of the country. The security situation limits access to Project locations for World Bank supervision and 
poses risks for frontline implementers, both government and UN agencies, as well as beneficiaries. In continuation of the 
operating modality established under the parent Project, the proposed AF will only operate in locations where the 
security situation is not expected to create risks of successfully delivering cash assistance to poor and vulnerable 
households – a risk that is largely now mitigated by the use of mobile money. In addition, WFP’s role in service delivery 
provides additional insights to MoLSA via the United Nations (UN) system for identifying and managing security threats 
to its operations. 
 
50. 
In general, risks of the proposed AF in being unable to deliver cash assistance to poor and vulnerable households 
– which is the essence of the Project – are largely mitigated by the use of a robust and multilayered M&E system which 
ensures accountable and effective implementation. This includes the risks of leakage and other kinds of fraud which will 
continue to be monitored and mitigated with the use of secure biometrically-enhanced beneficiary identification; 
transfer of electronic beneficiary lists to the mobile network provider through secure data exchange protocols; use of 
the GRM to address complaints; regular field monitoring by WFP and MoLSA staff; and ongoing site visits by the TPM 
agency. The TPM arrangement specifically carries out key informant interviews and documentation reviews, following 
each payment cycle to assess the compliance of processes with established protocols, check whether the right amounts 
have been paid to intended recipients, and understand the use of cash by beneficiaries. These findings continue to 
provide MoLSA with an overview of implementation challenges and inform course adjustments. 
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 22 of 38 
 
 
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
A. Economic and Financial Analysis 
 
51. 
Somalia has a population of about 15 million, of which roughly 60 percent are nomadic and seminomadic 
pastoralists, and 60 percent live in rural areas. About 70 percent of the population live below the poverty line (estimated 
based on US$1.90 a day in 2011 purchasing power parity terms)17 and this figure is expected to have increased in recent 
years following the compounding shocks of floods, the COVID-19 pandemic, the desert locust plague, and recent drought, 
all of which have adversely affected economic growth and household consumption. The war in Ukraine is the latest in a 
series of shocks on prices of staple goods which pose serious risks of food insecurity. 
 
52. 
The ongoing drought crisis is expected to continue through mid-2022 with the greatest impact on the central 
and southern parts of the country. The Food and Agriculture Organization’s (FAO) Somalia Water and Land Information 
Management (SWALIM) drought monitoring tool indicates that about 80 percent of the country is currently facing 
extreme drought conditions. Households currently face water shortages, limited milk availability, and a lack of saleable 
livestock as animals die from starvation and the condition of those remaining deteriorates. The rising costs of water and 
feed for livestock, as well as migration to distant areas in search of pasture and water, have led to very high debt burdens 
among pastoral households.18 
 
53. 
The war in Ukraine has also increased the prices for energy and food at a time when households are severely 
affected with the worsening drought conditions. The price for a twenty-liter jerrycan of cooking oil doubled from US$25 
to around US$50 within a week, while the price for a liter of gasoline nearly trebled from US$0.64 to US$1.80 in the same 
timeframe. A record increase in global food prices have been driving staple food purchases beyond the reach of most 
poor rural, urban and displaced families across Somalia. Before this overseas conflict, food prices had already been 
increasing with livestock dying or decreasing in quality, and harvests of cereals well below long-term averages.  
 
54. 
The enhanced and expanded cash transfers under the proposed AF will help mitigate the impact of the multiple 
crises affecting Somalia, as expected from similar policy responses undertaken in the region. Reliance on cash transfers 
as effective safety nets in times of crisis have increased significantly in recent years, especially in response to COVID-19, 
in all regions of the world. Social assistance protects investments on human capital and productive assets. Existing 
literature also suggests that cash transfers can help promote household food security in a post-disaster context through 
dietary diversity,19 reduce negative coping strategies such as self-imposed dietary restrictions, child labor and dangerous 
work, to meet needs,20 and that households receiving cash transfers experience less hunger compared to household who 
did not receive the transfer.21 
 
17 World Bank (2019). Somali Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment – Findings for Wave 2 of the Somali High-Frequency Survey. 
 
18 https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/somalia-faces-risk-famine-ipc-phase-5-multi-season-drought-and-soaring-food-prices 
 
19 Bailey, S. and K. Hedlund (2012). The impact of cash transfers on nutrition in emergency and transitional settings: A review of evidence. Overseas 
Development Institute. 
 
20  Lehmann C. and D. Masterson (2014). Emergency economies: The impact of cash assistance in Lebanon; An impact evaluation of the 2013–2014 
winter cash assistance program for Syrian refugees in Lebanon. Beirut: International Rescue Committee. 
 
21 Banerjee A., Faye M., Krueger A., Niehaus P. and T. Suri (2020). Effects of a Universal Basic Income during the pandemic. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 23 of 38 
 
 
55. 
The proposed AF will protect the human capital gains of the parent Project and help mitigate extreme poverty 
and hunger among the targeted beneficiaries and contribute to immediate food security and consumption needs. As 
the current drought is pushing more people into extreme poverty and vulnerability, the frontloading of funds as a vertical 
top-up under the first AF, and the plan to provide temporary ECT to non-Baxnaano households under the proposed 
second AF, will prove to be critical. Baxnaano currently covers 8 percent of the total population, and the horizontal and 
vertical expansion of cash transfers will enhance coverage to 15 percent of the country’s population to meet basic needs 
during the ongoing drought for at least six months. For the 200,000 existing beneficiaries receiving shock-responsive top-
ups under the first AF, and the 155,000 non-Baxnaano households entitled to ECT under the proposed second AF, the 
total transfer amount of US$60 monthly covers about 59 percent of the cost of minimum expenditure basket (CMB) for 
urban/main markets for the month of February 2022.22 
 
B. Technical 
 
56. 
The parent Project addresses human capital needs from a strategic developmental perspective, and effective 
shock-responsive delivery for building resilience and addressing food insecurity. The Baxnaano program, financed by 
the parent Project and first AF, would continue functioning in the same way under the proposed AF. The cash transfers 
provided intend to enable households to protect and invest in their children’s health and education and thereby gradually 
build human capital. They are also intended to function in a manner whereby addition benefits can be provided to the 
same households (i.e. vertical expansion) or non-participating households can be temporarily served (i.e. horizontal 
expansion) to safeguard assets and boost purchasing capacity for food and basic needs in times of distress. 
 
57. 
MoLSA will amend the existing contract with WFP to include Component 1 funds from the proposed AF. The 
current cohort of 200,000 households are already included in the program and no incremental logistical actions will be 
required to continue providing cash transfers. The population segment eligible for temporary ECT is either already pre-
identified having been supported under the SNLRP Phase I or will be identified using the established targeting process. 
The scale up to 20,000 new households would largely follow procedures which have already been used to deliver cash 
assistance by WFP, but with a move towards the newly adopted targeting methodology. In this manner, the proposed AF 
would enable Baxnaano to continuously implement and learn from new modalities, while a longer-term sustainability 
strategy is developed in partnership with the broader development community. Cash delivery will continue to be made 
via mobile money for which WFP has established partnerships with commercial banks and telecommunications service 
providers. Payments are expected to continue on a quarterly basis to facilitate payroll preparation, disbursement and 
reconciliation, as well as to provide income predictability to households which would facilitate financial decision-making. 
 
58. 
Expansion of the household registration in the USR will support a strong foundation upon which a 
comprehensive national database of the poor and vulnerable can be built. Registration of approximately 200,000 poor 
and vulnerable households in the USR will mean that some additional 1.2 million poor and vulnerable individuals will be 
included in the national database, equivalent to approximately 8 percent of the population and 11 percent of the poor 
in Somalia. This, in addition to the coverage under SNLRP of 15 percent of the poor, will bring total registration in the 
database to 26 percent of the poor and 19 percent of the total population. The data would enable rapid mobilization of 
assistance in response to future shocks. As such, MoLSA will continue to mobilize resources to expand USR registration 
as well as seek other programs’ collaboration to register their beneficiary households using the CRF, ensuring data sharing 
between their databases and the USR. 
 
 
22 https://www.fsnau.org/sectors/markets 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 24 of 38 
 
59. 
The Project continues to operate amid the COVID-19 pandemic and program implementers would ensure 
adherence to national regulations for contagion control as well as all provisions in applicable environmental and social 
instruments. The use of protective equipment by program administrators and facilitators, social distancing during 
community events, use of virtual platforms for training, use of mobile payments for benefit delivery, among others, will 
continue and thus help mitigate risks of COVID-19 transmission. 
 
60. 
The proposed AF has been designed in close consultation with development partners. This collaboration will 
continue and expand during the implementation of the Project, particularly through the various working groups and 
platforms established to coordinate efforts across complementary safety net interventions. Specifically, MoLSA will lead 
coordination efforts via the SPWG given its leadership role in the social protection sector, as well as through the Food 
Security, Nutrition and Social Protection sub-working group and the Technical Working Group on Social Protection. The 
World Bank will remain engaged through the SDWG and the CWG which serve as key platforms for coordination across 
development and humanitarian agencies. WFP’s SCOPE system would also help coordinate targeting activities between 
Baxnaano and WFP-implemented humanitarian interventions. 
 
61. 
As the Project supports the transition from a relief-focused mode of ensuring livelihoods, income and food 
security in the short-term towards a modality focused on building household and institutional resilience and human 
capital, it will be critical for FGS and development partners to consider the financing requirements for the program. 
Based on its current coverage and benefit level Baxnaano requires US$48 million annually, exclusive of the delivery cost, 
to sustain regular nutrition-linked transfers to the current 200,000 households which represents around 11.5 percent of 
the population living in poverty (or 8.0 percent of the total population). The same amount would be needed for a 
beneficiary base of this size in case of a crisis or disaster where payment of a shock-responsive top-up is authorized for a 
six-month period. A significant portion of recurrent budget would thus be necessary for the program to operate with 
such a critical mass and efforts would be undertaken to identify potential sources of funding for the period beyond 
December 2023 when the cash transfer budget is expected to be fully delivered to the original beneficiary cohort. 
 
C. Financial Management  
 
62. 
A financial assessment of WFP conducted for the parent Project will be fully adopted by the proposed AF and 
aligned with the Financial Management Framework Agreement (FMFA) between the World Bank and the UN. The 
assessment of the technical design and end-to-end cash transfer business processes under the parent project undertaken 
with the support of WFP remains relevant. The financial management systems and arrangements include budgeting, 
accounting, internal controls, funds flow, financial reporting, internal and external auditing arrangements, financial 
management staffing, risk management, and related policies, procedures and practices. These will facilitate the 
preparation of regular, timely and reliable financial statements and support the provision of a complete, true and fair 
record of all transactions and balances, help safeguard assets, ensure rigorous audits, all in line with World Bank financial 
management policies and internationally accepted standards. 
 
63. 
Given the Use of Country Systems (UCS) in Somalia, the proposed AF will adopt this approach in various aspects 
of financial management as is the case for the parent Project and first AF. This will cover budgeting, accounting and 
reporting, and oversight arrangements with the Office of the Auditor General. The External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
(EAFS) units within the Offices of the Accountant General of the FGS will remain responsible for overall financial 
management, with the PIU continuing to carry out day-to-day functions under their guidance. The effectiveness of the 
EAFS units, alongside other relevant functional units, will be continuously monitored while capacity strengthening 
opportunities will be identified and supported to ensure effective financial management operations.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 25 of 38 
 
 
D. Procurement 
 
64. 
Procurement under the proposed AF will be carried out in accordance with standard policy documents. These 
include the (i) Procurement Regulations for Borrowers under Investment Project Financing (IPF): Goods, Works, Non-
Consulting Services and Consulting Services (July 1, 2016; revised November 2017, August 2018 and November 2020) and 
(ii) Guidelines on Prevention and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits 
and Grants (revised July 1, 2016); and (iii) Financing Agreement. 
 
65. 
No significant new procurement is anticipated, and the major procurement-related activity would be the 
amendment to the existing contract between MoLSA and WFP for an expansion of the cash transfers under Component 
1. The Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) prepared under the parent Project will remain applicable, 
and the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) portal will continue to be used to update procurement 
plans and conduct all procurement transactions. Implementation arrangements will remain unchanged and continue to 
be strengthened. Relevant PIU officials, including a Procurement Specialist, have been provided necessary training 
including on the Procurement Regulations and use of STEP. 
 
E. Legal Operational Policies 
 
. . 
 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
No 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 
No 
.
 
F. Environmental and Social  
 
66. 
Activities under the proposed AF are expected to have moderate environmental and social risks and impacts. 
Key social risks relate to the (i) security of payments, (ii) potential exclusion of the target population and particularly 
poor, vulnerable and minority women, (iii) gender norms that can be restrictive for women and girls leading to increased 
GBV/SEA/SH risks where registration for cash transfers is exchanged for sexual favors, (iv) systemic weaknesses to 
respond to such risks, (v) remoteness and security risks that restrict access for effective stakeholder engagement, 
community participation and grievance redress, as well as to Project workers and beneficiaries, and (vi) breach of data 
security related to the collection, use, and storage of data for the USR. Collectively, and given that both implementing 
partners (WFP and UNICEF) have a strong track record and robust systems for effective implementation, risks and impacts 
are considered moderate. However, the residual contextual risks of operating in a conflict zone with endemic fragility 
and protracted conflict and insecurity means complex dynamics where community consultations, oversight and variable 
capacity to redress harm, can easily lead to substantial risks and impacts. 
 
67. 
As activities and implementation arrangements under the proposed AF will remain materially consistent with 
the parent Project, measures already in place to manage environmental and social risks and impacts will continue to 
apply. These include the active social risk management instruments, namely the Social Management Plan (SMP) 
(including the GBV Action Plan (GBVAP) and Security Management Plan (SeMP)) and Labor Management Procedures 
(LMP). The Environmental and Social Review Summary (ESRS) has been updated to detail social risk mitigation measures 
to be adopted by the proposed AF, as well as environmental and social performance and lessons learnt from the parent 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 26 of 38 
 
Project. Community consultations will be conducted in new districts where new households will be targeted for Baxnaano 
participation, and the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP) have 
been updated accordingly (May 17, 2022). Any amendments to the contract between MoLSA and WFP will reflect 
environmental and social framework (ESF) provisions in alignment with the parent Project. 
 
68. 
GBV/SEA/SH continues to be a threat to women and girls throughout Somalia both as a significant contextual 
and Project-related challenge in similar operations, and in the context of the ongoing drought which may create or 
exacerbate risks.  As families lose their livelihoods, suffer hunger and food insecurity, the vulnerability of women and 
girls to the risks of sexual abuse and exploitation increases as they seek to access Project services. In addition, Project 
workers, in particular female workers, can be at risk of sexual harassment by colleagues or supervisors. Mitigation 
measures that will continue to apply to address GBV/SEA/SH risks include integrating codes of conduct with GBV/SEA/SH-
related protections; community consultations and sensitization activities to raise awareness of risks; mapping of and 
collaboration with potential service providers in Project affected areas; development of a GBVAP; and strengthening of 
the GRM with procedures and channels to enable safe, confidential and ethical reporting of GBV/SEA/SH incidents. 
 
G. Climate Change 
 
69. 
Somalia is highly prone to frequent and devastating climatic shocks, such as floods and droughts, as well as 
biological shocks such as locust infestations which themselves are driven by the effects of climate change. These shocks 
disproportionately impact poor and vulnerable households that have limited capacity to respond. The parent Project and 
its first AF provided predictable cash transfers to address the resulting chronic food insecurity, and the proposed second 
AF will continue delivering cash assistance and will expand this reach by 93 percent. The regular transfers for Baxnaano 
beneficiaries, as well as ECT for non-Baxnaano households will enable recipients to meet urgent food consumption needs, 
mitigate climate-induced risks and avoid harmful negative coping strategies with environmental impacts such as cutting 
down trees to make charcoal for sale, among others. Additionally, the Project will continue efforts to address demand-
side challenges of malnutrition among children and pregnant and lactating women, by building linkages between 
Baxnaano and nutrition service providers. 
 
70. 
The establishment of a national shock-responsive safety net system with Project support will address the 
institutional side of resilience-building to climatic shocks. The use of the distress index for the geographical selection of 
target locations incorporates climatic considerations as the exposure to shocks and severity of food insecurity correlates 
to the localized impacts of climatic events. Household data to be collected for household targeting includes data on 
climate-dependent livelihoods to help assess vulnerability.  Populating household data in the forthcoming social registry 
will support rapid identification and categorization of beneficiaries for outreach in the event of future crises. The gradual 
use of the USR for the registration and selection of the poorest and most vulnerable households for safety net expansion 
will operationalize the system and pave the way for its future application across social sectors. This would enable 
improved beneficiary identification for other interventions, such as nutrition, social and economic inclusion services, 
further contributing to improved resilience against climatic and other shocks. 
 
H. Gender  
 
71. 
Women and girls in Somalia have been disproportionately impacted by the multiple crises and food insecurity 
as they face specific challenges to social, economic and decision-making access. Article 11 of the Provisional 
Constitution, stipulates that “all citizens, regardless of sex, religion, social or economic status, political opinion, clan, 
disability, occupation, birth or dialect shall have equal rights and duties before the law.” Nonetheless, traditional and 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 27 of 38 
 
religious norms limit women’s roles outside the domestic sphere, thereby restricting participation in political and public 
decision-making forums. Despite increasing engagement in economic activities, women’s involvement in wage labor 
remains low (33 to 40 percent) and mainly concentrated in the agriculture and informal sector. 
 
72. 
The proposed AF, via the Baxnaano program, will continue to tackle these gender gaps and GBV/SEA/SH risks 
in several ways. The program will continue to prioritize women as the direct recipient of the cash transfers, thereby 
improving their access to predictable income, closing the gap on income inequality, and enhancing women’s decision-
making power in the household and community. Mobile payments would improve financial inclusion by connecting 
women to the broader mobile money platform, which can be used for other financial activities. As in the parent Project, 
the proposed AF will ensure women receive their benefits through secured mobile money arrangements including the 
provision of subscriber identification module (SIM) cards in their names. Improved health, nutrition and education of 
mothers and children, as well as participating women’s financial literacy can be expected, as Baxnaano will continue to 
link households to broader social services to support human capital accumulation and economic empowerment. In the 
medium to longer terms, it is envisioned that sustained cash transfer support will enhance economic inclusion of women 
and overall gender equity. 
 
73. 
The proposed AF will provide continuity for initiatives under the parent Project which help to mitigate risks of 
GBV/SEA/SH incidents and support survivors. Cash assistance to poor and vulnerable households enables women and 
girls to avoid moving to urban areas and IDP camps during shocks, which is a common coping strategy during 
emergencies, and thereby minimizing their exposure to GBV/SEA/SH. However, cash transfers may also increase 
exposure to GBV/SEA/SH in the short term, and mitigation measures such as local level facilitation by cooperating 
partners, which include women staff, will be essential to ensure effective outreach to female beneficiaries. The mapping 
of GBV services undertaken by the parent Project will be updated by the proposed AF and facilitating access to these 
services by potential GBV survivors will continue be supported. The GRM and TPM agency also include female staff to 
ensure female beneficiaries are able to voice potential concerns or complaints in a safe environment. Progress in closing 
gender gaps will be measured through gender-specific and gender-disaggregated data in the Project’s results framework. 
 
I. 
Citizen Engagement 
 
74. 
All aspects of citizen engagement established under the parent Project and first AF will apply, as the proposed 
AF will contribute to the Baxnaano scale up for shock-response without significant design changes. The existing 
arrangements governing Baxnaano implementation and the WFP contract for service delivery will continue to be in place. 
Citizen engagement channels include, among others, the local CSC, a uniform communications strategy, the GRM and 
TPM arrangements. 
 
75. 
The CSC have had a positive role in presenting community priorities and the inclusion of women has helped 
women beneficiaries in coming forward with their concerns. Further work will be undertaken to improve capacity, 
particularly in raising awareness on emerging issues and the use of grievance management avenues. Program-related 
communication involves a multi-pronged strategy comprising radio broadcasts, bulk mobile messaging and infographic 
posters to deliver essential content such as information on beneficiary rights and entitlements and means to reach the 
CFM and WFP’s cooperating partners. The GRM has proven effective with multiple channels, comprising the CFM which 
operates at the local level and the MoLSA administered national call center. Nearly 5,000 complaints were submitted via 
the GRM between July and November 2021 of which 94 percent were addressed and closed within one month of receipt. 
These mechanisms also coordinate with complaints and feedback systems established by other development partners 
such as the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) which enhance learning and operational response. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 28 of 38 
 
Finally, TPM to solicit beneficiary feedback provides regular insights on issues such as the types of expenditures made 
after receipt of cash transfers, timeliness and satisfaction with payment delivery, the quality of services provided by 
WFP’s cooperating partners, among others. This data further enhances the Project’s M&E capacity and allows for 
informed decision-making by Baxnaano implementers. 
 
V. WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS 
 
76. 
Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB) supported 
project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the WB’s Grievance Redress 
Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address project-related 
concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection 
Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of WB non-compliance with its policies and 
procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the WB’s attention, 
and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond.  For information on how to submit complaints to the 
WB’s corporate GRS, please visit http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-
redress-service. For information on how to submit complaints to the WB Inspection Panel, please visit 
www.inspectionpanel.org. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 29 of 38 
 
 
     
 
VI    SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES 
 
 
Changed 
Not Changed 
Results Framework 
  ✔ 
   
Components and Cost 
  ✔ 
   
Loan Closing Date(s) 
  ✔ 
   
Implementing Agency 
     
✔ 
Project's Development Objectives 
     
✔ 
Cancellations Proposed 
     
✔ 
Reallocation between Disbursement Categories 
     
✔ 
Disbursements Arrangements 
     
✔ 
Legal Covenants 
     
✔ 
Institutional Arrangements 
     
✔ 
Financial Management 
     
✔ 
Procurement 
     
✔ 
Other Change(s) 
     
✔ 
 
 
VII   DETAILED CHANGE(S) 
   
COMPONENTS 
Current Component Name 
Current Cost 
(US$, millions) 
Action 
Proposed Component 
Name 
Proposed Cost (US$, 
millions) 
Nutrition-linked 
Unconditional Cash 
Transfers 
161.00 Revised 
Nutrition-linked 
Unconditional Cash 
Transfers 
299.00 
Delivery Systems and 
Institutional Capacity 
Building 
6.00 No Change 
Delivery Systems and 
Institutional Capacity 
Building 
6.00 
Project Management, 
Monitoring and Evaluation, 
and Knowledge 
Management 
8.00 No Change 
Project Management, 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation, and 
Knowledge 
8.00 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 30 of 38 
 
Management 
 
0.00 New 
Household Registration 
in the Unified Social 
Registry 
5.00 
TOTAL 
 175.00  
 
 318.00 
 
 
LOAN CLOSING DATE(S) 
Ln/Cr/Tf 
Status 
Original Closing 
 
Current 
Closing(s)  
 
Proposed  
Closing  
 
Proposed Deadline 
for Withdrawal 
Applications 
IDA-D5100 
Effective 
31-Aug-2022 
31-Aug-2023 
31-Dec-2024 
30-Apr-2025 
IDA-D8560 
Effective 
31-Aug-2023 
31-Aug-2023 
31-Dec-2024 
30-Apr-2025 
     
 Expected Disbursements (in US$) 
 DISBURSTBL 
Fiscal Year 
Annual 
Cumulative 
2020 
22,168,446.00 
22,168,446.00 
2021 
29,064,582.00 
51,233,028.00 
2022 
93,766,972.00 
145,000,000.00 
2023 
80,000,000.00 
225,000,000.00 
2024 
80,000,000.00 
305,000,000.00 
2025 
13,000,000.00 
318,000,000.00 
2026 
0.00 
318,000,000.00 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
Risk Category 
Latest ISR Rating 
Current Rating 
 
Political and Governance 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
Macroeconomic 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ High 
 
Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ Moderate 
⚫ Moderate 
 
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and 
Sustainability 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Fiduciary 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 7, 2022 
Page 31 of 38 
 
 
Environment and Social 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Moderate 
 
Stakeholders 
⚫ Moderate 
⚫ Moderate 
 
Other 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Overall 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
   LEGAL COVENANTS2 
LEGAL COVENANTS – Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital 
Project (P178730) 
Sections and Description 
 
 
Financing Agreement; Schedule 2; Section I.B (Update of Output Agreement): Without limitation to Section I.A 
above, the Recipient shall, by not later than three (3) months after the Effective Date of this Agreement, update the 
Output Agreement with WFP in a manner and substance satisfactory to the Association, in order to: (a) extend 
WFP’s services for the provision of Cash Transfers under the Cash Transfer Program (“CTP”) to CTP Beneficiaries 
under this additional financing; (b) expand WFP’s services to include the provision of Emergency Cash Transfers to 
ECT Beneficiaries; and (c) incorporate the arrangements required for the data collection activities for the Unified 
Social Registry under Part D of the Project. 
 
Financing Agreement; Schedule 2; Section I.C (Third-Party Monitoring Agreement): In furtherance of Sections I.A 
above, the Recipient shall, within three (3) months of the Effective Date: (a) amend the terms of reference of, and 
contract with, the TPM Consultant to extend the completion date; or (b) hire a new third-party monitoring 
consulting firm; and thereafter maintain such consultancy throughout the remaining period of implementation of 
the Project, all, in a manner and substance satisfactory to the Association, in order to continue monitoring the 
performance of the CTP until the new Closing Date, and incorporate the monitoring of the expanded scope of 
activities. 
 
 
 
Conditions 
 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 9, 2022 
Page 32 of 38 
 
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING 
     
 
Results Framework 
COUNTRY: Somalia  
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project 
RESULT NO PDO 
Project Development Objective(s) 
 
The project development objective is to provide cash transfers to targeted poor and vulnerable households and establish the key building blocks of a national shock-
responsive safety net system. 
 
Project Development Objective Indicators by Objectives/ Outcomes 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
 
Nutrition-linked Unconditional Cash Transfers  
Beneficiaries of social safety net programs (CRI, Number)  
0.00 
2,250,000.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Beneficiaries of social safety net programs - Female (CRI, 
Number)  
0.00 
1,125,000.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Delivery Systems and Institutional Capacity Building  
National cash transfer program targeting methodology 
developed and endorsed by FGS (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
Operational design of the national Social Registry developed and 
endorsed by FGS (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 9, 2022 
Page 33 of 38 
 
PDO Table SPACE 
 
Intermediate Results Indicators by Components 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
 
Component 1: Nutrition-linked Unconditional Cash Transfers  
Households receiving cash transfers (Number)  
0.00 
375,000.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Households receiving shock-responsive benefits to cope with 
an adverse climatic event (Number)  
0.00 
338,000.00 
Action: This indicator is New  
Women directly receiving cash transfers (Percentage)  
0.00 
85.00 
Action: This indicator is New  
Women who benefited from the nutrition services (Percentage)  
0.00 
25.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Children under 5 years of age who benefitted from the nutrition 
program (Percentage)  
0.00 
25.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Beneficiaries receiving cash transfer payments within the 
timeframe specified in the Operations Manual (Percentage)  
0.00 
90.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 9, 2022 
Page 34 of 38 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
 
Registered grievances that are addressed within the timeframe 
specified in the Operations Manual (Percentage)  
0.00 
85.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Component 2: Delivery Systems and Institutional Capacity Building  
Social protection policy framework and medium-term strategic 
roadmap developed and endorsed (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
Government-led Social Protection Working Group established 
and functional (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
Cash Transfer payment delivery system design prepared and 
endorsed (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
National Cash Transfer MIS system developed (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
National Cash Transfer GRM developed and endorsed (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Management  
Design of a pilot intervention for youth-targeted productive 
safety net is prepared (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
Household Registration in the Unified Social Registry (Action: This Component is New) 
Households registered in the USR (Number)  
0.00 
200,000.00 
Action: This indicator is New  
 
IO Table SPACE 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 9, 2022 
Page 35 of 38 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators Mapped 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Beneficiaries of social safety net programs  
Quarterly 
 
WFP SCOPE 
 
Program specific MIS 
 
MoLSA and WFP 
 
Beneficiaries of social safety net 
programs - Female 
 
Quarterly 
 
WFP SCOPE 
 
Program specific MIS 
 
MoLSA and WFP 
 
National cash transfer program targeting 
methodology developed and endorsed by 
FGS 
 
Once 
 
Official letter 
from MoLSA 
confirming 
endorsement 
 
MoLSA PIU informs the 
World Bank 
 
MoLSA 
 
Operational design of the national Social 
Registry developed and endorsed by FGS 
Operational design of a 
national social registry to 
include a database of poor 
households that can be 
targeted for safety net and 
other assistance in times of 
climate and other 
emergencies. 
Once 
 
Official letter 
from MoLSA 
confirming 
endorsement 
 
MoLSA PIU informs the 
World Bank 
 
MoLSA 
 
 
ME PDO Table SPACE 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators  Mapped 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Households receiving cash transfers 
Households which are 
chronically poor and 
vulnerable to climatic and 
other shocks, of which (i) 
those having children 
Quarterly 
 
WFP SCOPE 
 
Program specific MIS 
 
MoLSA and WFP 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 9, 2022 
Page 36 of 38 
 
under 5 years of age 
entitled to regular 
nutrition-linked cash 
transfers and eligible for 
shock-responsive top-ups, 
and (ii) others eligible for 
ECT. 
Households receiving shock-
responsive benefits to cope with an 
adverse climatic event 
Baxnaano households 
receiving shock-responsive 
benefits (i.e. vertical 
program expansion) and 
non-Baxnaano households 
receiving ECT (i.e. 
horizontal program 
expansion) specifically in 
response to the prevailing 
drought crisis. 
Quarterly 
 
WFP SCOPE 
 
Program specific MIS 
 
MoLSA and WFP 
 
Women directly receiving cash transfers 
Baxnaano households with 
mothers and/or female 
caregivers as mobile 
money accountholders and 
thus direct cash recipients, 
and non-Baxnaano 
households where a female 
member is the direct 
recipient. 
Quarterly 
 
WFP SCOPE 
 
Program specific MIS 
 
MoLSA and WFP 
 
Women who benefited from the nutrition 
services 
 
Quarterly 
 
WFP SCOPE 
 
Program specific MIS 
 
MoLSA and WFP 
 
Children under 5 years of age who 
benefitted from the nutrition program 
 
Quarterly 
 
WFP SCOPE 
 
Program specific MIS 
 
MoLSA and World Bank 
 
Beneficiaries receiving cash transfer 
payments within the timeframe specified 
 
Quarterly 
 
TPM 
 
Program specific MIS; 
TPM quarterly data 
MoLSA, WFP and TPM 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 9, 2022 
Page 37 of 38 
 
in the Operations Manual 
collection 
 
Registered grievances that are addressed 
within the timeframe specified in the 
Operations Manual 
Indicative of performance 
of citizen engagement. 
Quarterly 
 
TPM 
 
Program specific MIS, 
TPM quarterly data 
collection 
 
MoLSA, WFP & TPM 
 
Social protection policy framework and 
medium-term strategic roadmap 
developed and endorsed 
 
Once 
 
MoLSA 
Progress 
Reports 
 
MoLSA PIU informs the 
World Bank 
 
MoLSA 
 
Government-led Social Protection 
Working Group established and functional  
Once 
 
MoLSA 
Progress 
Reports 
 
MoLSA PIU informs the 
World Bank 
 
MoLSA 
 
Cash Transfer payment delivery system 
design prepared and endorsed 
 
Once 
 
MoLSA 
Progress 
Reports; 
Supervision 
Missions 
 
MoLSA PIU informs the 
World Bank 
 
MoLSA 
 
National Cash Transfer MIS system 
developed 
 
Once 
 
MoLSA 
Progress 
Reports; 
Supervision 
Missions 
 
MoLSA PIU informs the 
World Bank 
 
MoLSA 
 
National Cash Transfer GRM developed 
and endorsed 
 
Once 
 
MoLSA 
Progress 
Reports; 
Supervision 
Missions 
 
MoLSA PIU informs the 
World Bank 
 
MoLSA 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project (P178730) 
 
 
 
 
 
June 9, 2022 
Page 38 of 38 
 
Design of a pilot intervention for youth-
targeted productive safety net is prepared  
Once 
 
Design 
proposal 
available and 
shared 
 
Submission by MoLSA 
PIU 
 
MoLSA 
 
Households registered in the USR 
 
Quarterly 
 
USR 
 
Program specific MIS 
 
MoLSA and WFP 
 
 
ME IO Table SPACE 
 
 
 
 
   
