 
 
 
Document of 
The World Bank 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD5018  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT PAPER 
ON A  
PROPOSED ADDITIONAL GRANT 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 14.9 MILLION 
 (US$20.0 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
AND 
 
A GRANT 
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$3.0 MILLION 
FROM THE HEALTH EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE MULTI-DONOR TRUST FUND 
 
TO THE  
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA  
 
FOR THE 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING FOR SOMALIA COVID-19 EMERGENCY VACCINATION PROJECT 
JUNE 29, 2022 
 
UNDER THE COVID-19 STRATEGIC PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE PROGRAM (SPRP) 
USING THE MULTIPHASE PROGRAMMATIC APPROACH (MPA) 
 
WITH A FINANCING ENVELOPE OF 
UP TO US$ 6 BILLION APPROVED BY THE BOARD ON APRIL 2, 2020 AND 
UP TO US$ 12 BILLION ADDITIONAL FINANCNG APPROVED BY THE BOARD 
ON OCTOBER 13, 2020 
 
 
Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
 
 
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
 
 
   
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective May 31, 2022) 
 
Currency Unit  =   Somali Shilling (SOS) 
US$1 = SOS 578.50 
US$1 = SDR 0.74 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Hafez M. H. Ghanem 
Country Director: Keith E. Hansen 
Regional Director: Amit Dar 
Practice Manager: Francisca Ayodeji Akala 
Task Team Leaders: Carmen Carpio, Bernard O. Olayo 
  
 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
AEFI 
Adverse Events Following Immunization  
AF  
Additional Financing  
AU-AVAT 
African Union African Vaccine Acquisition Trust 
AZ 
AstraZeneca 
BP 
World Bank Procurement 
CERC  
Contingent Emergency Response Component  
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework 
COVAX Facility  
COVID-19 Vaccines Global Access Facility  
CoVDP 
COVID-19 Vaccine Delivery Partnership 
COVID-19  
Coronavirus Disease 2019  
DO  
Development Objective  
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
EPI  
Expanded Program for Immunization  
ESMAP 
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program 
ESMF  
Environmental and Social Management Framework  
ESMP 
Environmental and Social Management Plans 
FA 
Financing Agreement 
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 
FGM 
Female Genital Mutilation 
FM  
Financial Management  
FMOH 
Federal Ministry of Health 
FMS 
Federal Member State 
FPA 
Fiduciary Principles Accord 
FRS 
Federal Republic of Somalia 
FTCF  
Fast Track COVID-19 Facility  
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
EPI  
Expanded Program on Immunization  
Gavi  
Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunizations  
GDP  
Gross Domestic Product  
GBV 
Gender Based Violence 
GII 
Gender Inequality Indices 
GM 
Grievance Mechanism 
HEIS 
Hands on Enhanced Implementation Support 
HEPRTF 
Health Emergency Preparedness and Response Multi-Donor Trust Fund 
HNP  
Health, Nutrition, and Population  
IBRD  
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  
ICU  
Intensive Care Unit  
IDA  
International Development Association  
IDP 
Internally Displaced Person 
IPC 
Infection Prevention and Control 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
IMST 
Incident Management Support Team 
IFRs 
Interim Unaudited Financial Reports 
IFMIS 
Integrated Financial Management Information System 
IG 
Inspector General 
IPF  
Investment Project Financing 
 
 
 
ISA 
International Standards on Auditing 
ISR 
Implementation Status and Results Report 
J&J 
Johnson and Johnson 
MDTF 
Multi-donor Trust Fund 
M&E  
Monitoring and Evaluation  
MOH  
Ministry of Health  
MPA  
Multiphase Programmatic Approach  
NAPA 
National Adaptation Program of Action 
NCC 
National Coordination Committee 
NCD  
Non-communicable disease  
NDVP 
National Deployment and Vaccination Plan 
NGO  
Non-Government Organization  
NRA 
National Regulatory Authority 
NTWG 
National Technical Working Group 
NVDP  
National Vaccination and Deployment Plan  
OCHA 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
PAD  
Project Appraisal Document  
PCIU 
Project Coordination Implementation Unit 
PDO  
Project Development Objective  
PFM 
Public Financial Management 
POM  
Project Operational Manual  
PP 
Procurement Plan 
PPE  
Personal Protective Equipment  
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development 
PrDO  
Program Development Objective of SPRP (Global COVID-19 Response MPA)  
RCRF 
Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing 
RMNCAH 
Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health 
SCoA 
Standard Charter of Accounts 
SCRP 
Somalia Crisis Response Project 
SDD 
Solar Direct Drive 
SEAH 
Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment 
SEP  
Stakeholder Engagement Plan  
SIDRA 
Somali Institute for Development Research and Analysis 
SMP 
Security Management Plan 
SOP 
Standard Operating Procedures 
SPRP  
Strategic Preparedness and Response Program, also known as Global COVID-19 MPA  
SRA  
Stringent Regulatory Authorities  
STEP  
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement  
TA 
Technical Assistance 
TF 
Trust Fund 
TPM 
Third-Party Monitoring 
UCS 
Use of Country Systems 
UN 
United Nations 
UNDP 
United Nations Development Programme 
UNICEF  
United Nations Children’s Fund  
VAC  
Vaccine Approval Criteria (of the World Bank)  
VDDM  
Vaccine Delivery and Distribution Manual  
VIRAT  
Vaccine Introduction Readiness Assessment Tool 
 
 
 
VLMIS 
Vaccine Logistics Management and Information System  
VRAF  
Vaccine Readiness Assessment Framework  
WBG  
World Bank Group  
WHO  
World Health Organization  
WMP 
Waste Management Plan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Somalia 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
I. 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING ........................................ 9 
A. 
Introduction ................................................................................................................. 9 
B. 
Consistency with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) .................................. 12 
C. 
Project Design and Scope .......................................................................................... 12 
D. 
Project Performance .................................................................................................. 13 
E. 
Rationale for Additional Financing ............................................................................ 14 
F. 
National Capacity and COVID-19 Vaccination Plan .................................................. 14 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING .................................................................... 19 
A. 
Proposed Changes ...................................................................................................... 19 
B. 
Sustainability .............................................................................................................. 26 
III. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 26 
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................................. 30 
V. WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS .............................................................................. 40 
VI    SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES ..................................................................................... 41 
VII   DETAILED CHANGE(S) .................................................................................................... 41 
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 47 
ANNEX 1: LIST OF COVID VACCINES MEETING WORLD BANK APPROVAL CRITERIA AS OF 
06/21/2022 ......................................................................................................................... 64 
ANNEX 2: SUMMARY OF THE PARENT PROJECT COMPONENTS ............................................ 70 
ANNEX 3: DETAILED FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS ........................................ 72 
 
 LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1: Updated Assessment of the Summary of Vaccination Readiness Findings conducted on March 
31, 2022 ........................................................................................................................................... 15 
Table 2: National Vaccine Coverage and Acquisition Plan (updated on April 21, 2022 ) ....................... 17 
Table 3: Priority Groups for Vaccination in Somalia (March 31, 2022) ................................................ 23 
Table 4: Project Cost and Financing (US$ Million) .............................................................................. 23 
Table 5: Summary of COVID-19 Vaccine Sourcing and Bank Financing ................................................ 24 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 80 
 
 
       
BASIC INFORMATION – PARENT (Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project - P176956) 
 
 
Country 
Product Line 
Team Leader(s) 
Somalia 
IBRD/IDA 
Carmen Carpio 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Resp CC 
Req CC 
Practice Area (Lead) 
P176956 
Investment Project 
Financing 
HAEH2 (10210) AECE2 (6542) 
Health, Nutrition & 
Population 
  
Implementing Agency: FEDERAL MINISTRY OF HEALTH 
 ADD FIN TBL1 
Is this a regionally tagged 
project? 
 
No 
 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
 
No 
 
Approval Date 
Closing Date 
Expected 
Guarantee 
Expiration Date 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
28-Sep-2021 
30-Jun-2024 
 
Substantial 
  
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Parent 
[✓] Multiphase Programmatic Approach [MPA] 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[✓] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[✓] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 80 
 
Development Objective(s) 
 
MPA Program Development Objective (PrDO) 
The Program Development Objective is to prevent, detect and respond to the threat posed by COVID-19 and 
strengthen national systems for public health preparedness 
Project Development Objectives (Phase 004) 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support the Federal Republic of Somalia to acquire and deploy 
Project COVID-19 vaccines and to strengthen national immunization capacity. 
 
Ratings (from Parent ISR) 
 
 
RATING_DRAFT_YES 
 
 
 
Implementation 
 
13-Jan-2022 
Progress towards achievement of PDO 
S 
 
Overall Implementation Progress (IP) 
S 
 
Overall ESS Performance 
MU 
 
Overall Risk 
H 
 
Financial Management 
S 
 
Project Management 
MS 
 
Procurement 
MS 
 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MS 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency 
Vaccination Project - P178886) 
 
ADDFIN_TABLE 
Project ID 
Project Name 
Additional Financing Type 
Urgent Need or Capacity 
Constraints 
P178886 
Additional Financing for 
Somalia COVID-19 
Emergency Vaccination 
Project 
Restructuring, Scale Up 
Yes 
Financing instrument 
Product line 
Approval Date 
Investment Project 
Financing 
IBRD/IDA 
30-Jun-2022 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 80 
 
Projected Date of Full 
Disbursement 
Bank/IFC Collaboration   
 
 
31-Dec-2025 
No 
 
 
Is this a regionally tagged project? 
 
No 
 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Child 
[✓] Multiphase Programmatic Approach [MPA] 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[  ] Conflict 
[✓] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on, Enhanced Implementation Support (HEIS) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
 
 Disbursement Summary (from Parent ISR) 
 
Source of Funds 
Net  
Commitments 
Total Disbursed 
Remaining Balance 
Disbursed 
IBRD 
 
 
 
  
 
 % 
IDA 
  45.00 
 
  43.09 
  
 
0 % 
Grants 
 
 
 
  
 
 % 
 
MPA Financing Data (US$, Millions) Financing 
MPA Program Financing Envelope  
18,000.00 
 
MPA FINANCING DETAILS (US$, Millions) 
 
MPA FINANCING DETAILS (US$, Millions) Approved 
Board Approved MPA Financing Envelope:  
18,000.00 
MPA Program Financing Envelope: 
18,000.00 
of which Bank Financing (IBRD): 
9,900.00 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 80 
 
of which Bank Financing (IDA): 
8,100.00 
of which other financing sources: 
0.00 
 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency 
Vaccination Project - P178886) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
SUMMARY (Total Financing) 
 
Current Financing 
Proposed Additional 
Financing 
Total Proposed 
Financing 
Total Project Cost 
45.00 
23.00 
68.00 
Total Financing 
45.00 
23.00 
68.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
45.00 
20.00 
65.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILSNewFinEnh1- Additional Financing 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
20.00 
          IDA Grant 
20.00 
Non-World Bank Group Financing 
     Trust Funds 
3.00 
          Health Emergency Preparedness and Response Multi-Donor Trust 
3.00 
 
   
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Guarantee Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
0.00 
  20.00 
   0.00 
  20.00 
National PBA 
0.00 
  20.00 
   0.00 
  20.00 
Total 
0.00 
20.00 
   0.00 
20.00 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 80 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
Does the project require any other Policy waiver(s)? 
[ ✔ ] Yes   [    ] No 
Explanation 
Yes, a waiver to enable Management approval of individual projects under SPRP with a Substantial rating for 
environmental and social risks. 
Has the waiver(s) been endorsed or approved by Bank Management? 
Approved by Management  [✔]              Endorsed by Management for Board Approval [  ]                No [  ] 
Explanation 
Yes, it is one of the waivers granted through the Global SPRP MPA Project (P173789). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 80 
 
 
ESStandards 
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Not Currently Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
ESStandardsNote 
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Health, Nutrition & Population 
 
Contributing Practice Areas 
 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 80 
 
PROJECT TEAM 
 
Bank Staff 
Name 
Role 
Specialization 
Unit 
Carmen Carpio 
Team Leader (ADM 
Responsible) 
TTL 
HAEH2 
Bernard O. Olayo 
Team Leader 
Co-TTL 
HAEH2 
Francis Akolu Muthuiya 
Procurement Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Procurement 
EAERU 
Stephen Diero Amayo 
Financial Management 
Specialist (ADM Responsible) 
FM 
EAEG1 
Svetlana Khvostova 
Environmental Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Environment 
SAEE2 
Vanessa Sigrid Tilstone 
Social Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Social 
SAES2 
Abdirahman Zeila Dubow 
Environmental Specialist 
Environment 
SAEE2 
Anne Margreth Bakilana 
Team Member 
Human Development 
HAEDR 
Evarist F. Baimu 
Counsel 
Legal 
LEGAM 
Janerose Muboka Lubisia 
Team Member 
Adminstrative 
AEMSO 
Jean O Owino 
Team Member 
Disbursements 
WFACS 
Jessica Leete Werner 
Flannery 
Team Member 
Health Operations 
HAWDR 
Khamar Abdirahman 
Abdinoor 
Team Member 
Health Operations 
HAEH2 
Late Felix Lawson 
Team Member 
Disbursement 
WFACS 
Liying Liang 
Team Member 
Health Operations 
HAEH1 
Lydia Ndebele 
Team Member 
M&E 
HAWH2 
Martin M. Serrano 
Counsel 
Legal 
LEGAM 
Mary Kigasia Amuyunzu 
Nyamongo 
Team Member 
Safeguards 
SAES2 
Naoko Ohno 
Team Member 
Health Operations 
HEAHN 
Ntayi Anfani Bandawa 
Counsel 
Legal 
LEGAM 
Nyabicha Omurwa Onang'o Team Member 
Procurement 
EAEG1 
Peggy Ayako Kwendo 
Team Member 
Administrative 
AEMSO 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 80 
 
Sujani Eli 
Team Member 
Administrative 
HAEH2 
Toni Lee Kuguru 
Team Member 
Quality Assurance 
HAEH2 
Tracy Hart 
Environmental Specialist 
Environment 
SENDR 
Verena Phipps-Ebeler 
Team Member 
Social 
SAES2 
 
Extended Team 
Name 
Title 
Organization 
Location 
   
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 79 
 
I. 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
A. 
Introduction 
1. 
This Project Paper seeks the approval of the World Bank’s Eastern and Southern Africa Regional Vice President  
to provide a grant in the amount of SDR14.9 million  (US$20.0 million equivalent) from the International 
Development Association (IDA) and a US$3.0 million grant from the Health Emergency Preparedness and Response 
Multi-Donor Trust Fund (HEPRTF) for an Additional Financing (AF) to the Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination 
Project. The proposed AF would support the costs of expanding activities of the Somalia COVID-19 Emergency 
Vaccination Project (P176956), under the COVID-19 Strategic Preparedness and Response Plan (SPRP) using the 
Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) approved by the Board of Executive Directors on April 2, 2020, and the 
vaccines AF to the SPRP approved on October 13, 20201.  The main objectives of the proposed AF are to: (a) ensure 
affordable and equitable access to COVID-19 vaccines; (b) ensure vaccine distribution by strengthening the health care 
system; (c) further strengthen preparedness and response activities under the parent project; and (d) support the 
continuity of essential health services.  The Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination parent project in an amount of 
SDR 31.6 million (US$45.0 million equivalent) was approved on September 28, 2021.  
 
2. 
The purpose of the proposed AF is to provide upfront financing to the Government to further support the 
deployment of COVID-19 vaccines that meet the World Bank’s vaccine approval criteria (VAC), strengthen relevant 
health systems that are necessary for successful deployment, and support the continuity of essential health 
services.  The proposed AF will help with deployment efforts to vaccinate 70 percent of Somalia’s population free of 
cost to the population.  By May 2022, the country had received 66.5 percent of the vaccines required to vaccinate the 
70 percent target population.  Nationally, 2.74 million COVID-19 vaccine doses have been administered in Somalia 
since the start of the vaccine rollout, corresponding to 1.42 million people (9 percent of the total population) fully 
vaccinated. In terms of gender, of those vaccinated, 43 percent are female, and 57 percent are male. Uptake of COVID-
19 vaccination has largely been skewed towards the urban areas, with 89 percent of those in urban areas vaccinated 
relative to only 4.3 percent in rural areas (with remainder distributed between internally displaced persons [IDPs], 
nomadic, and refugee populations). Under the COVID-19 Vaccines Global Access Facility (COVAX), 840,000 doses of 
Astra Zeneca (AZ), and 231,600 doses of Sinopharm were received in March 2021.  Additional doses were donated by 
foreign governments totaling 7,291,290 doses. Donations included vaccines received from China (700,000 doses of 
Sinopharm), France (360,000 doses of AZ, and 2,505,600 doses of Johnson and Johnson (J&J)), and Türkiye (293,000 
doses of Sinovac), among others (see Table 2). These additional doses will cover the first and second stage priority 
population, which for phase one includes health care workers, border patrol staff, police officers, municipal workers, 
and teachers. Phase two includes people with co-morbidities and elderly people over 50 years of age. According to 
the states’ micro plans, at least 20-30 percent of IDPs (consisting of 9,976 nomads and 3,159 registered refugees) have 
been targeted for vaccination. Implementation challenges including inadequate vaccine storage capacity (including 
sufficient functional cold rooms for storage) due to ongoing bilateral vaccine donations, transportation within Federal 
Member States (FMS), acquiring tax exemption status when vaccines are airlifted from Kenya, challenges obtaining 
vaccine utilization data at the sub-national level, and ensuring vaccines are utilized prior to their expiration date. 
Outside of COVAX agreements, Somalia has no additional agreements with manufacturers, but will consider 
 
1 The World Bank approved a US$12 billion WBG Fast Track COVID-19 Facility (FTCF or “the Facility”) to assist IBRD and IDA countries in addressing 
the global pandemic and its impacts. Of this amount, US$6 billion came from IBRD/IDA (“the Bank”) and US$6 billion from the International 
Finance Corporation (IFC). The IFC subsequently increased its contribution to US$8 billion, bringing the FTCF total to US$14 billion. The Additional 
Financing of US$12 billion (IBRD/IDA) was approved on October 13, 2020 to support the purchase and deployment of COVID-19 vaccines as well 
as strengthening the related immunization and health care delivery system.   
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 79 
 
purchasing additional vaccines that meet the World Bank’s VAC through other procurement methods such as direct 
contracting with vaccine manufacturers, the African Union African Vaccine Acquisition Trust (AU-AVAT), and others 
that may be identified. World Bank financing for the COVID-19 vaccines and deployment will follow World Bank VAC.  
As of April 16, 2021, the World Bank will accept as threshold for eligibility of IBRD/IDA resources in COVID-19 vaccine 
acquisition and/or deployment under all World Bank-financed projects: (i) the vaccine has received regular or 
emergency licensure or authorization from at least one of the Stringent Regulatory Agencies (SRAs) identified by the 
World Health Organization (WHO) for vaccines procured and/or supplied under the COVAX Facility, as may be 
amended from time to time by WHO; or (ii) the vaccine has received WHO Prequalification (PQ) or WHO Emergency 
Use Listing (EUL).   
 
3. 
The COVID-19 Vaccine Delivery Partnership (CoVDP) provides a new vaccine supply landscape for Somalia, 
allowing the country to accelerate its efforts to close the vaccine equity gap and achieve a broader population 
coverage target in 2022. CoVDP was launched in January 2022 by United Nations International Children's Emergency 
Fund (UNICEF), World Health Organization (WHO), and Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, and supported by a large network 
of partners. These agencies are accelerating concerted support to 34 countries where national COVID-19 vaccination 
coverage was below 10 percent and off-track to reach 70 percent by June 2022, to unlock bottlenecks hindering their 
vaccination efforts. With the current rate of vaccination, Somalia is among the 34 priority countries. The poor 
infrastructure, weak health system, fragility, inadequate resources, sub-optimal and inadequate human resource 
capacity to deal with complex planning and operations and security situation are among the bottlenecks facing the 
vaccine roll out in Somalia.  
 
4. 
The need for additional resources to expand the COVID-19 response was formally conveyed by the Federal 
Republic of Somalia (FRS) in a letter dated February 26, 2022.  The proposed AF will form part of an expanded health 
response to the pandemic, which is being supported by development partners under the coordination of the Federal 
Ministry of Health (FMOH). Recognizing the global nature of health emergencies, in June 2020, the World Bank Board 
of Executive Directors approved the creation of a new umbrella trust fund program, the Health Emergency 
Preparedness and Response (HEPR) Program. The development objective of the Program is to support eligible 
countries and territories to improve their capacities to prepare for, prevent, respond and mitigate the impact of 
epidemics on populations. It was set up as a flexible mechanism to provide catalytic, upfront and rapid financing at 
times that other sources of funding are not available for health emergency preparedness and to fill specific gaps in 
terms of health emergency responses. Activities eligible for HEPR Program financing focus on two pillars: (a) 
preparedness for future health emergencies; and (b) responses to emerging and current health emergencies. The 
HEPR Multi-donor Trust Fund (MDTF) is the anchor Trust Fund (TF) of the HEPR Program. Somalia has been allocated 
a HEPR MDTF grant of US$3.0 million that will be used exclusively for vaccine deployment and activities that support 
strengthening of health systems. Purchase of vaccines is not eligible under these TF resources. Additional World Bank 
financing will provide essential resources to enable the expansion of a sustained and comprehensive pandemic 
response2 in Somalia that will appropriately include vaccination. 
 
5. 
The COVID-19 pandemic runs the risk of undermining the modest recent progress on economic and political 
reforms in one of the most challenging country contexts in the world.  As of June 11, 2022, there have been 26,748 
confirmed cases of COVID-19, with 1,350 deaths reported in the country since the pandemic began and a case fatality 
 
2 Comprehensive Pandemic Response implies the provision of essential health services to the population 
https://unsdg.un.org/sites/default/files/2021-12/un-comprehensive-response-covid-19-2021.pdf  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 79 
 
ratio of 5.05 percent.3 The cities reporting the highest incidence of COVID-19 cases are Hargeisa (Somaliland) and 
Madina (Banaadir region), with a weekly incidence rate of 0.1 percent and 0.4 percent respectively per 100,000 
population.  Since the first case was confirmed in March 2020, there has been widespread local transmission to all 
states, diverting limited resources towards the COVID-19 health response, triggering economic disruptions, and 
exacerbating long-standing vulnerabilities and disparities.  To tackle the pandemic, preventive measures such as the 
closing of borders, schools, limiting travel and large gatherings were adopted. Additional measures include: (a) 
strengthening of testing capacity at the National Public Health and Reference Laboratory in Mogadishu and 
establishment of testing capacity in Somaliland and Puntland; (b) putting in place rapid response teams; and (c) 
expanding the country’s intensive care unit bed capacity. Domestic COVID-19 restrictions and international travel 
restrictions were lifted on April 19, 2022, although social distancing guidelines and wearing facemasks within health 
facilities remained mandatory. Due to disruptions in economic activity stemming from lockdown measures, the 
economy contracted by about 1.5 percent in 2020. The growth outlook for 2021 was estimated at around 2 percent 
given the recovery in household consumption, compared to a pre-COVID 19 forecast of 3.2 percent. Projected growth 
for 2022 is estimated at 2.7 percent.4 
 
6. 
The risks from the COVID-19 pandemic are exacerbated by the worsening drought crisis in Somalia and the 
constrained fiscal space from the war in Ukraine.  Somalia is the most severely drought affected country in the Horn 
of Africa.5 Erratic rainfall triggered by climate change is resulting in more frequent and extreme floods as well as 
droughts. Three failed consecutive rainy seasons in the last two years have resulted in most parts of the country 
experiencing severe drought conditions, with FRS declaring a state of emergency due to drought on November 23, 
2021 with urgent appeals for international assistance.67 As of April 2022, most parts of the country are experiencing 
severe drought conditions.8 Approximately 4.5 million people have been affected by the drought – a significant 
increase from 3.2 million in December 2021, while IDPs have almost tripled from 245,000 to 697,000 people due to 
lack of food, water and pasture.9 It is estimated that between 1 to 1.5 million people could move from rural to urban 
areas in search for humanitarian assistance and services by June 2022.10 Moreover, the war in Ukraine is constraining 
Somalia’s fiscal space to address the crisis context, as Ukraine is a major commodity producers.  Disruptions have 
caused global prices to soar, especially for oil and natural gas and food costs11.  Somalia will face higher prices for 
commodities like food and energy, and will face disrupted trade and supply chains.  The drought and international 
conflict will impact food and nutrition as rising food prices and shortages will limit access to food leading to 
malnutrition and will further strain already limited health resources to attend to a growing malnutrition crisis.   
 
3 Somalia Federal Republic Ministry of Health and Human Services and WHO Somalia Country Office. (2022). COVID-19 Situation Report – 
Somalia Issue 118 (5 - 11 June 2022). https://mcusercontent.com/cd9d6d0a38b5bbbd90d426e7e/files/bcaddf6e-59ec-2b67-d628-
15e15df65a17/Somalia_COVID_19_Situation_Report_5_11_June_2022.pdf 
4 International Monetary Fund. (May 2022). PRESS RELEASE NO. 22/160: Somalia and IMF Staff reach Staff-Level Agreement on the Second and 
Third Reviews of the Extended Credit Facility. Retrieved from https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2022/05/19/pr22160-somalia-and-imf-
staff-reach-staff-level-agreement-on-reviews-of-extended-credit-facility 
5 A statement from James Swan, the UN Secretary General’s Special Representative and Head of the UN Assistance Mission in Somalia at the 
UN Security Council Briefing in New York on Feb 15, 2022, Humanitarian situation in Somalia remains extremely dire: UN envoy 
(garoweonline.com)   
6 Somalia Humanitarian Bulletin, November 2021.pdf (reliefweb.int) 
7 Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Somalia Water and Land Information Management Project (SWALIM). Somalia Drought Update. 
January 27, 2022. 
8 SWALIM. January 27, 2022. 
9 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA) (2022). Somalia Drought Situation Report No.5 (20 March 
2022). https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/somalia-drought-situation-report-no5-20-march-2022. 
10 International Organization for Migration (IOM). Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM). Drought Analysis 2021. December 2021.  
11 international Monetary Fund (IMF) – March 15, 2022  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 79 
 
B. Consistency with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF)   
7. 
The proposed AF is aligned to the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF), FY19-22 for 
Somalia (Report No. 124734-SO) discussed by the Board of Executive Directors on September 25, 2018. Specifically, 
it will support the CPF’s Objective 1.3 to “improve delivery systems for more inclusive social services” by expanding 
access for the most vulnerable groups to COVID-19 vaccines, free of charge. The need to invest in health systems is 
recognized globally as a development need, and hindered by longstanding challenges arising from limited human 
capital investments and need to build up social resilience systems. Consequently, the proposed AF was designed to 
strengthen the health system against recurrent COVID-19 surges and its ability to respond to shocks. In addition, the 
project aims to provide support for Somalia’s COVID-19 vaccination campaign, which is a critical aspect of the WBG’s 
broader objective to strengthen the social contract and capacity of the state to deliver services, and support Somalia’s 
transition from fragility over the long-term. In addition, the proposed AF is consistent with the following goals: (a) the 
World Bank Group (WBG) strategic priorities to end extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity; and (b) the 
February 2020 World Bank Group Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV) for 2020-2025, to create inclusive, 
effective social sector services.  
 
8. 
The national COVID-19 vaccination program is in line with the vision to equitably expand access to efficacious 
vaccines, free of charge to all vulnerable groups, using multiple delivery channels.  The proposed AF is also consistent 
with Somalia’s Ninth National Development Plan (2020-2024) which prioritizes improving health access and outcomes 
and emphasizes collaboration and cooperation with non-state actors for health service delivery, which is consistent 
with some of the key implementation modalities proposed under the AF. 
C. Project Design and Scope 
9. 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the parent project is to support the Federal Republic of Somalia 
to acquire and deploy COVID-19 vaccines and to strengthen national immunization capacity.  The parent project has 
two components: Component 1: Vaccine Deployment and Acquisition (US$31.0 million equivalent) and Component 2: 
Implementation Management (US$14.0 million equivalent).   
 
10. 
The FMOH is responsible for the overall technical oversight of the project, leveraging the recently established 
Project Coordination Implementation Unit (PCIU) for project management and engaging United Nations (UN) 
agencies for direct implementation.  The relatively young FMOH established less than a decade ago aims to play its 
stewardship role in a challenging context of managing multiple actors with limited human and financial resources.  
While the FMOH has leadership structures and some policies and procedures in place, its decision-making processes 
and management systems are not fully defined, and capacity to manage programs independently is limited. Given the 
emergency nature of the COVID-19 vaccination roll-out and the limited Government capacity to deliver services and 
provide stewardship to the sector, the proposed institutional arrangements leverage existing structures and proven 
implementation capacity.  The recently established PCIU for the Improving Healthcare Services in Somalia Project, 
Damal Caafimaad, (P172031), within the FMOH, has a Project Coordinator, Procurement Specialist, and Financial 
Management Specialist on board and is being further strengthened through the recruitment of a broader team of 
specialists (security, project management, safeguards).  The PCIU already supports project implementation for the 
parent project and will continue to provide support with a reinforced team of specialists.  Under the parent project, 
two UN agencies are being engaged to provide continuous implementation support to the FMOH.  Standard 
Agreements have been drafted outlining the tasks each UN agency will undertake which are expected to be finalized 
by July 31, 2022.  UNICEF will support the FMOH’s COVID-19 vaccination efforts with transportation, supply chain and 
logistics; social mobilization efforts; and key procurements for vaccines and waste management supplies.  The WHO 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 79 
 
will provide program management support, technical assistance for vaccine safety monitoring, on-the-ground 
coordination, and human resource management and training. This same modality of engaging UN agencies will be 
followed under the proposed AF to engage the United Nations Officer for Project Services (UNOPS) to manage the 
hospital refurbishment activities. 
D. 
Project Performance  
11. 
The parent project’s progress toward achievement of the PDO and overall implementation was rated 
Satisfactory in the last Implementation Status and Results report (ISR) (January 2022), and although progress has 
been slow, there has been progress on key actions.  The parent project was approved on September 28, 2021. The 
Finance Agreement (FA) was signed on October 26, 2021 and declared effective on March 26, 2022.  As of June 28, 
2022, the project has been under implementation for three months from the date of effectiveness, and no 
disbursements have been made. Under Component 1 of the parent project, US$13.0 million equivalent has been 
allocated for the purchase of COVID-19 vaccines through the AU-AVAT mechanism to support the Government’s goal 
of vaccinating 70 percent of its population.  The FMOH team sent a letter to AU-AVAT (dated December 11, 2021) 
indicating its interest to procure 5,171,275 doses of J&J vaccines via the AU-AVAT platform.  In early January, the 
FMOH scaled down its request to 1.6 million doses to align with the available financing under the project of US$13 
million equivalent for vaccine purchase.  However, since the Government received sufficient doses donated by 
bilateral partners and COVAX, there was no need to move forward with the vaccine purchase.  However, the 
Government has since updated its vaccination strategy in making the commitment to reach pregnant women at the 
second trimester and adolescents 12 years of age and above.  Based on this, the FMOH is re-assessing its vaccine 
purchasing strategy in line with a distribution schedule for these groups and appropriate technical guidance on the 
vaccine manufacturer (e.g. Pfizer recommended for children 12 and under). Under Component 2 of the parent project, 
weekly rapid check-in meetings are held with the counterpart team to proactively engage and ensure overall 
implementation readiness.  The Project Operational Manual (POM) was approved, key positions have been filled 
(project coordinator, procurement specialist, environmental and social specialist) with further recruitments under 
way, and environmental and social safeguards documents have been finalized and disclosed.  Despite the progress, 
delays were experienced related to the hiring of legally required12 project consultants due to delays in the FMOH team 
defining the shared implementation arrangements between the COVID-19 and Damal Caafimaad projects.  
Furthermore, the FMOH awaited having a clear understanding on COVID-19 vaccine donations to determine the 
quantity of vaccines to be procured under the parent project.  
 
12. 
Under the parent project, contracting arrangements have been designed to leverage the capacity of key UN 
agencies collaborating with the FMOH to provide ongoing support to the COVID-19 vaccination program.  UNICEF is 
being contracted under the parent project to manage the transportation, supply chain and logistics capacity to 
distribute the vaccines from the main warehouse in Nairobi to three key locations (Mogadishu for mainland Somalia, 
Garowe, Puntland; and Hargeisa, Somaliland).  UNICEF will also support the FMOH to manage the social mobilization 
efforts to increase confidence in vaccines and the purchase of waste management supplies based on the FMOH 
standard waste management protocols.  WHO is being contracted to provide technical support to the MOHs at the 
levels of national (FMOH), Federal Member State (FMS), and Somaliland.  WHO technical assistance will enhance 
monitoring and evaluation, support the development of waste management protocols, strengthen capacity to 
implement the vaccination program through vaccine safety monitoring of Adverse Events Following Immunization 
(AEFI), data management, and COVID-19 surveillance monitoring and evaluation, including data analysis and 
 
12 Effectiveness condition in the parent project Grant Agreement. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 79 
 
dashboard development and use, and development of training materials and procedures for micro planning and 
supervision tools.  
E. Rationale for Additional Financing 
13. 
The proposed AF will support the FRS increase COVID-19 vaccination coverage, strengthen health systems 
against recurrent COVID-19 surges, and support continuity of essential health services.  The proposed AF will 
contribute to accelerating COVID-19 vaccine uptake by reinforcing vaccine deployment strategies focusing on the 
implementation of micro-plans in the FMS.  Furthermore, the FMOH is committed to scale up vaccination efforts at 
the FMS-level in recognition of the low utilization during Ramadan.  The proposed AF will enhance the ongoing 
response to the epidemic including the roll out of Somalia’s NDVP.  Besides protecting lives, the vaccines will help the 
country interact safely with neighboring countries.  The proposed AF will also help upgrade the health infrastructure 
for enhanced service delivery including free, safe, and equitable access to all vaccines and strengthened emergency 
services. Moreover, it will help procure pharmaceuticals, commodities, and supplies for other key health services to 
compensate for acute shortages exacerbated by the pandemic. 
 
14. 
The proposed AF will form part of an expanded health response to the pandemic. The activities will build on 
the parent project, which has an original closing date of June 30, 2024 and will be extended to December 31, 2025 
through the AF.  The AF also builds on the World Bank’s existing health portfolio in the country.  The proposed AF will 
finance vaccine deployment including planning and systems for in-country delivery and non-vaccine activities. This will 
bring the World Bank administered financing to a total of US$68.0 million of which US$65.0 million equivalent is IDA.   
F. National Capacity and COVID-19 Vaccination Plan  
15. 
With support from partners, namely UNICEF and WHO, the FMOH is improving its readiness to enlarge the 
COVID-19 vaccination campaign.  Key activities and related issues are summarized as follows: 
(i) 
A National Deployment and Vaccination Plan (NDVP) for COVID-19 vaccines (February 2021) was 
designed in collaboration with the WHO and UNICEF, which are supporting the FMOH (Box 1).   
(ii) 
Vaccine Readiness Assessment of the country’s capacity, completed in April 2021, generated information 
on key strengths and gaps to be addressed in distributing COVID-19 vaccines (Table 1). 
(iii) 
A COVID-19 Vaccine Survey in June 2021 and another one conducted by the Africa’s Voices Foundation 
in May 2021 noted the need for better-targeted solutions, including: (a) greater use of sources such as 
religious leaders, nomadic elders, and influential figures to serve as role models; and (b) expanded use 
of platforms (e.g. radio, social media, women’s groups, and the Somalia Social Mobilization Network, 
which were successful with the polio-eradication campaigns).  Despite the positive views expressed in 
various surveys, vaccine hesitancy is still prevalent, which will require greater efforts to reach the 
population with appropriate messaging. 
(iv) 
The FMOH, with support from partners, developed a National Vaccine Coverage and Purchase Plan 
(Table 2) which is continuously updated. Somali authorities aim to use a combination of strategies to 
secure sufficient vaccines and ensure equitable access, including using the COVAX facility and the AU-
AVAT, along with donations from countries with surplus. 
(v) 
Authorities will vaccinate the target population at fixed and outreach sites.  Priority groups have been 
identified consistent with the WHO SAGE framework (Table 3). 
(vi) 
Coordinating mechanisms have been created, including a National Coordination Committee (NCC), a 
National Technical Working Group (NTWG), and an Incident Management Support Team (IMST) for the 
COVID-19 vaccination program.   
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 79 
 
(vii) 
A National Regulatory Authority (NRA) was very recently established to ensure rapid approval of COVID-
19 vaccines. 
(viii) 
According to the NDVP, modalities exist to enter into indemnity and liability agreements for COVID-19 
vaccines (Box 2).  
(ix) 
The UN Mission to Somalia set up a One UN Platform (UN COVAX Taskforce) to ensure the rollout is 
coordinated, including support for supply chains/logistics, training, communications, and mobilizing 
resources.  UNICEF is providing support to monitor vaccine use, minimize the risk of wastage, and track 
cold chains and vaccine stock levels. 
(x) 
Plans have been adopted to ensure accountability, traceability, and security of the COVID-19 vaccines, 
and use independent groups to carry out third party monitoring. 
(xi) 
A mobile telephone-based electronic registration system, CommCare, was introduced to record patient 
information and to monitor adverse events and send SMS reminders for second doses13.  
16. Liability and indemnification issues in vaccine acquisition have been described in Box 2 of the previously approved 
PAD for the parent project, the Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P176956). 
Table 1: Updated Assessment of the Summary of Vaccination Readiness Findings conducted on March 31, 2022 
Readiness domain  
Readiness of Government  
Key gaps to address before and during 
deployment  
 
Planning and coordination  
NTWG established, TWG meetings occur (ad hoc), 
NDVP validated in March 2021.   
 
The NCC lacks the sub-pillar structure to closely 
coordinate all COVAX pillars.   
Need to regularize the TWG meetings that now 
occur on an ad-hoc basis. 
Budgeting  
Description of COVID-19 vaccine program costs (e.g., 
purchase, operating and human resources’ costs) in 
Government budgets and/or planning documents 
shows most will be funded with external resources.  
Management guidelines for appropriations from 
the MoF/Treasury are needed.  
Regulatory  
Regulatory measures exist, including an expedited 
path for approving COVID-19 vaccines; national ones 
to clarify the import requirements, procedures to 
acquire import permits for COVID-19 vaccines, and a 
system to ensure the vaccine lot can be released in 
under two days. 
Continued monitoring of the release timeframe of 
imported COVID-19 vaccines.  
 
 
Prioritization, targeting, 
surveillance  
Target populations were prioritized and identified to 
reach 70 percent of the public.    
Consistent with its strategy to reach pregnant 
women at the second trimester and adolescents 
12 years of age and above, the FMOH will 
produce a vaccine distribution schedule for these 
groups.   
Service delivery  
Measures were developed to prevent/control 
infections. These included providing personal 
protection equipment (PPE) to minimize exposure 
during immunization sessions and creating vaccine 
delivery strategies, master lists of service providers, 
protocols to obtain consent to vaccinations, and IPC 
Contractual arrangements with key implementing 
agencies are being finalized which include 
Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) 
requirements. 
 
13 Data privacy considerations are built into these systems 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 79 
 
measures. Also, implementing agencies were named. 
Training and supervision  
Training plans to roll-out COVID-19 vaccines were 
introduced, WHO training materials were translated, 
security management firms were identified to 
develop risk plans, and regulations were created for 
personnel performing the vaccinations. 
On-site supervisors are needed at each vaccination 
outlet to monitor/report on vaccination progress.  
 
Third parties are needed for monitoring (TPM). 
Monitoring and evaluation  Surveillance and monitoring procedures are in place 
(to be shared with eligible health personnel), along 
with monitoring tools and institutional arrangements, 
measures to protect data, and a grievance 
mechanism. 
Implementation and reporting on grievances must
be addressed. 
Vaccine, cold chain, logistics, 
infrastructure  
The following were developed: a national logistics 
working group, a distribution strategy for storage 
sites, a plan for the energy needed, the dry storage 
and cold chain capacity and infrastructure needed at 
all levels was assessed and gaps identified; COVID-19 
appropriate standard operating procedures (SOPs) 
and protocols to collect and dispose of medical waste 
were adopted as was a Vaccine Logistics 
Management and Information System (VLMIS), along 
with delivery and acceptance regulations. 
UNICEF and the World Bank committed to 
providing complementary support to expand 
storage and cold chain capacity for vaccines. 
The VLMIS must be operational. 
 
Safety surveillance  
Guidelines and procedures for planning/conducting 
vaccine pharmacovigilance activities (AEFI) have been 
developed, including an AEFI committee to review 
COVID-19 vaccine safety data.   
Roles, responsibilities and a coordination 
mechanism among stakeholders to exchange 
COVID-19 vaccine safety information must be 
created and AEFI must be further supported by 
WHO.   
Demand 
generation 
and 
communication  
A social mobilization and engagement strategy/ 
demand plan was created with messages and 
materials for public communications and advocacy, 
along with data collection systems, including social 
media listening and rumor management. 
Support is needed to implement and adopt the 
GoS social mobilization and awareness-raising 
program to address vaccine hesitancy and 
increase uptake.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 79 
 
Table 2: National Vaccine Coverage and Acquisition Plan (updated on April 21, 2022) 
Source of 
financing  
Population 
targeted[1]  
Vaccine(s)  
Number 
of 
doses 
needed  
Estimated 
total  
U$ 
(millions)  
World 
Bank’s 
VAC 
Status 
Contract 
status  
Vaccines already arrived in the country  
%  
Number  
Source  
Name  
Price 
(US$/dose) 
Shipping 
(US$/dose)  
Name  
Doses  
Phase 1  
3 % (470,115 people - healthcare workers; border patrol staff, police, municipal workers, and teachers)  
COVAX 
vaccines  
2.4  
370,115  COVAX  
AZ/SII + 
Pfizer + 
TBC  
0  
0  
2 doses  
0  
4 SRA 
+ 
WHO 
EUL  
Delivered 
and 
distributed  
AZ  
300,000 (March 2021) 
Donations 
from China  
0.6  
100,000  China  
Sinopharm  
0  
0  
2 doses  
0  WHO 
EUL  
Delivered 
and 
distributed  
Sinopharm  
200,000 (April 2021)  
Phase 2  
17.6 % (2,758,013 people – population over 50 years old and people living with co-morbidities)  
COVAX 
vaccines and 
IDA grant for 
deployment  
17.6  2,758,013  COVAX  
J&J + Astra 
Zeneca + 
Pfizer   
0  
0  
1 or 2 
doses  
0  
4 SRA 
+ 
WHO 
EUL  
Delivered 
and 
distributed  
  Sinopharm, AZ  
  771,600 
(October 2021/ January 
2022) 
Phase 3 & 4 49.4 % (7,741,243 people – all other adults over 18 years old, including people with disabilities and IDPs + all eligible below 18 years)  
IDA grant for 
vaccine 
procurement 
and 
deployment  
10.0  1,567,053  AU/AVAT J&J + other 
vaccines  
8.43  
0  
1  
13,000,000  
 4 SRA 
+ 
WHO 
EUL  
Expression 
of interest 
to be 
signed   
   
   
Bilateral 
donors  
39.4 
6,174,190  
USA 
USA 
France 
France 
Germany 
Sweden 
China 
Taiwan, 
China 
Türkiye 
UK 
J&J 
Pfizer 
AZ 
J&J 
AZ 
AZ 
Sinopharm  
Sinovac 
AZ 
AZ 
0  
0  
1 or 2 
doses  
   0  
SRA + 
WHO 
EUL 
Delivered 
and 
distributed  
J&J 
Pfizer 
AZ 
J&J 
AZ 
AZ 
Sinopharm 
Sinovac 
AZ 
AZ 
638,400 (Aug-Nov 2021) 
738,930 (Mar-May 2022) 
360,000 (Jul-Sept 2021) 
2,505,600 (Jan 2022) 
163,200 (Aug 2021) 
520,800 (Oct-Nov 2021) 
500,000 (Dec 2021) 
150,000 (Jan 2022) 
 
293,000 (Mar 2022) 
149,760 (Apr 2022) 
COVAX 
 
 
COVAX 
TBC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 79 
 
Vaccines -
October-
December 
National 
Total goals 
as per 
NDVP  
70.0 %  10,969,371 
   
Multiple  
   
   
   
TBC  
   
   
   
7,291,290 
[1] The FRS uses a population estimate of 15,670,529 inhabitants, as per the Population Estimation Survey (PESS) of 2021  
(2) COVAX deliveries to Somalia since March 2021.  
Source: UNICEF COVAX Procurement Portal https://cpp.unicef.org/dashboard/1 11.04.22 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 79 
 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
A. Proposed Changes   
16. 
The proposed changes involve expanding the activities in the parent project and adjusting its overall 
design. The proposed AF will finance: (a) strengthening national immunization capacity and distribution; (b) 
strengthening service delivery to support the national immunization program and essential health services14; (c) 
tracking vaccine use and recording adverse reactions to vaccinations; and (d) mobilizing social/community 
engagement to increase confidence and demand for the vaccine.  
 
17. 
The project development objective (PDO), component structure, results framework, and environmental 
and social safeguard instruments of the parent project will be modified to reflect the expanded scope and 
activities proposed under the AF.  Given the expanded procurement of supplies for essential health services, 
the PDO will be revised from its initial goal “to support the Federal Republic of Somalia to acquire and deploy 
Project COVID-19 vaccines and to strengthen national immunization capacity.” It will be changed “to support the 
Federal Republic of Somalia to acquire and deploy Project COVID-19 vaccines, strengthen national immunization 
capacity, and support the continuity of essential health care services.” The implementation arrangements will 
be the same and the closing date will be extended from June 30, 2024 to December 31, 2025, which is consistent 
with the closing date of the global AF to the COVID-19 Strategic Preparedness and Response Program (Global 
COVID-19 MPA, P175450).  
 
(i) Proposed New Activities 
 
18. 
The proposed AF will support activities to increase the distribution of the vaccine through two existing 
components of the parent project and two new components. The proposed AF is geared to help the FRS work 
with WHO, UNICEF, and other partners to overcome the bottlenecks identified which relate to implementation 
capacity at the FMSs/ BRA level (including Somaliland).  The proposed AF will finance technical assistance (TA) 
to help Somalia strengthen its institutions to better distribute the vaccines. 
 
19. 
Component 1. Vaccine Deployment and Acquisition (parent project: US$31.0 million equivalent IDA, AF: 
US$3.0 million HEPRTF).  This is an existing component in the Parent Project. HEPRTF resources will support 
deployment only and will not be used to purchase COVID-19 vaccines. More specifically, support under the 
proposed AF would further support the following sub-components: 
 
20. 
Sub-component 1.1. Transportation, supply chain, and logistics capacity strengthening (parent project: 
US$11.0 million equivalent IDA).  No AF resources are being allocated to this component.  
 
21. Sub-component 1.2. Communication, social mobilization and community engagement to enhance 
uptake of the COVID-19 vaccine (parent project: US$5.0 million equivalent IDA). Under the parent project, 
US$5.0 million has been allocated to communication, social mobilization, and community engagement to 
enhance uptake of the COVID-19 vaccines.  In addition, other donors, namely UNICEF are actively supporting 
this area.  Based on this, no further resources are being allocated to this sub-component. 
 
 
14 Including the provision of Maternal and Child Health Care Services.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 79 
 
22. 
Sub-component 1.3. Acquisition of Additional Project COVID-19 vaccines (parent project: US$13.0 
million equivalent IDA).  Under the parent project, US$13.0 million has been allocated towards the purchase 
of vaccines.  No additional resources are needed for vaccine purchase, this is due to Somalia having received 
sufficient doses through donations.  The existing allocation of US$13 million  will be used to purchase vaccines 
in line with the expanded scope of the national vaccination strategy which now includes vaccinating pregnant 
women at the second trimester and adolescents 12 years of age and above, who were not part of the original 
target groups at the time the parent project was prepared.   
 
23. 
Sub-component 1.4. Health Care Waste Management (parent project: US$2.0 million equivalent IDA). 
Under the parent project, financing is available to support health care waste management, including handling 
of waste in flood-prone areas; occupational health; and support for waste management and disposal supplies, 
collection, transportation, and disposal of waste. No additional financing is being allocated to this sub-
component as the Government has secured funding of US$3.9 million for waste management from the Global 
Fund. 
 
24. 
Sub-component 1.5. Vaccine Deployment (AF: US$3.0 million HEPRTF ). This is a new sub-component 
being introduced and financed entirely by the HEPRTF.  Somalia was awarded a grant from the HEPRTF for 
health emergency response activities (i.e., for immediate health emergencies like epidemics or pandemics, 
such as the case with COVID-19 response or COVID vaccine efforts) on the understanding that: (a) funds would 
not be used to purchase COVID-19 vaccines; (b) funds would be applied to its own separate sub-component 
(i.e., not co-finance an existing project sub-component as funds are mingled in project components because 
funds are paid into the same Special Account; (c) funds would not be used for health system strengthening or 
routine vaccination campaigns; and (d) a separate disbursement category would be created for all HEPR funds.  
Based on the financing parameters allowed under the HEPRTF, a new sub-component 1.5 is being introduced 
under the proposed AF through which HEPR financing will be channeled.  HEPRTF resources will support COVID-
19 vaccine deployment activities, specifically, the acquisition of vaccination supplies and related equipment for 
vaccine administration.  
 
25. 
Component 2. Implementation Management (parent project: US$14.0 million equivalent IDA, AF: 
US$2.5 million equivalent IDA).  This is an existing component in the parent project.  The proposed AF will 
provide further support for supervision, coordination, and implementation support. 
 
26. 
Sub-component 2.1. Program Management Support (parent project: US$7.0 million equivalent IDA).  
No additional financing is being provided to this sub-component. Under the parent project, sufficient funds 
were allocated to engage with partners, particularly WHO, to provide specialized technical assistance and 
support to the FMOH at the national and FMSs/BRA levels (including to Somaliland), to improve 
monitoring/evaluation and oversight. The sub-component will help coordinate and manage parent project 
activities, including strengthening planning, budgeting and programming activities, handling quality control and 
monitoring safeguards. 
 
27. 
Sub-component 2.2. Supervision, Coordination, Human Resources Management and Training (parent 
project: US$5.0 million equivalent IDA, AF: US$2.5 million equivalent IDA).  The proposed AF will complement 
parent project funding and provide further support to activities financed under the parent project, which include 
providing planning and implementation support to the FMOHs at the FMSs/BRA level (including to Somaliland).  
This includes financing on-site supervision missions, logistical support, and provision of technical assistance, to 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 79 
 
respond to the needs of the FMSs/BRA. In addition, the proposed AF will enhance the support being provided 
to the FMOH, in the area of Human Resources for Health (HRH), to support the technical review of HRH (e.g., 
categories, distribution, incentive-structures), training assessment of HRH (pre- and in-service training), and 
delivering training to health workers and community workers, and other personnel responsible for the delivery, 
storage, handling, transportation (including training on climate shock emergency preparedness and response, 
with technical support from the UN agencies as needed). The health worker training will include a gender focus 
targeting three cadres - nurses, midwives, and female health workers at the community level.  For nurses, the 
focus will be on in-service training to enhance diagnostic and treatment efforts to respond to COVID-19 and for 
essential health services.  For midwives, the focus will be on the training-of-trainers that will identify and train 
tutors to provide continuous, accessible training on COVID-19 management in pregnant women.  For the female 
health workers, training will focus on improving their skills in being able to provide outreach in the communities. 
Training will incorporate communication strategies to disseminate information to the community to promote 
screening activities including immunizations, emphasizing the current COVID-19 vaccinations.  
 
28. 
Sub-component 2.3. Implementation Support (parent project: US$2.0 million equivalent IDA). No 
additional financing is being provided to this sub-component.  Under the parent project, funding is provided to 
support TPM and security risk assessments for each FMS. Specific activities include support to strengthening 
Security Risk Management Protocols, including security risk assessments and development of a security 
management plan (SMP) as identified in the Vaccine Readiness Assessment.  
 
29. 
Component 3. Continuity of Essential Health Services (AF: US$14.5 million equivalent IDA).  This is a new 
component.  COVID-19 has severely strained the health system, exposing severe gaps in public health 
infrastructure, placing enormous strain on the system itself as well as highlighting already existing inequities. 
Great emphasis has been placed on the emergency preparedness of the healthcare systems, yet very little has 
been done regarding the readiness of pre-curative services, patient management, and capacity for clinical surges 
both in terms of physical infrastructure, supply chain and human resource capacity. Furthermore, with Somalia 
facing the worst drought in over 30 years and constrained fiscal space from the war in Ukraine, the already 
limited health services made available to the population are even further limited.  COVID-19 restricted the 
movement of people which impacted access to food and health services, thereby limiting access to essential 
health services for women and children like reproductive health, immunization, and nutrition services.  The 
drought has made this even worse by further restraining access to food and health services, resulting in 
prevalent chronic malnutrition and wasting.  There is a need to strengthen the health system to provide essential 
services to women and children and to upgrade the health infrastructure and emergency health response at the 
primary, secondary, and tertiary level. 
 
30. 
Sub-component 3.1. Building Emergency Response Capacity at Hospitals (AF: US$12.5 million equivalent 
IDA).  This sub-component will build emergency response capacity at selected secondary and tertiary hospitals.  
The COVID-19 pandemic forced health facilities worldwide to urgently find medical supplies, including PPE 
supplies. Healthcare workers were extended beyond capacity and had to make difficult decisions based on 
resource constraints, as the volume of patients overwhelmed hospital emergency rooms. The sub-component 
will support select hospitals with additional resources to strengthen their capacity to respond to COVID-19, 
specifically in setting up isolation areas, fully functioning emergency departments and in acquiring respiratory 
support devices, and blood therapy inputs and capacity. The effort will include developing capacity for blood 
transfusions, respiratory therapy, triage response, solar powered oxygen, and isolation centers (in secondary 
and tertiary hospitals).  The proposed AF will help upgrade the infrastructure and develop the capacity to 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 79 
 
manage climate emergencies, including preparedness and response plans, creating a climate emergency 
hospital response team and upgrading medical capacity to handle the impacts of climate shocks (such as 
malnutrition, injuries, drowning, and climate-sensitive diseases). The aim is to support six regional hospitals at 
the FMS-level.  The infrastructure investments will be undertaken within the confines of the existing hospital 
compounds sitting on Government owned land. There will be no acquisition of new land as a result of the 
project. Updates to physical building infrastructure will include measures to improve the climate adaptation of 
facilities and to mitigate against climate change, including: passive cooling to reduce heat in facilities, measures 
to reduce the impacts of floods and storms, solar power, and installation of light emitting diode (LED) lights. The 
scope of works will include major renovations/civil works and installation of medical equipment to improve 
hospital capacity to respond to emergencies.  As with the parent project model of contracting UN agencies, the 
proposed AF will contract UNOPS to manage the hospital rehabilitation works.  Building on the lessons learned, 
the UNOPS contract will include provisions to ensure UNOPS responsibility for providing social and 
environmental safeguards oversight. Moreover, the Government will hire an external firm to provide oversight 
to the management and implementation of the hospital rehabilitation work conducted by UNOPS.  With regard 
to geographic alignment, the proposed AF is aligned with the Damal Caafimaad Project and the Somalia Crisis 
Response Project (SCRP) (P173315), the Damal Caafimaad Project finances service delivery of the Essential 
Package of Health Services (EPHS) yet does not finance hospital rehabilitation. The SCRP will finance the 
rehabilitation of primary and secondary health facilities in Hirshabelle, Jubaland, and South West States. The 
proposed AF will target primary and secondary health facilities that are not being supported by SCRP. 
 
31. 
Sub-component 3.2. Improving the Stocking and Procurement of Essential Supplies and Commodities 
across the Somalia Health System ( AF: US$2.0 million equivalent IDA).  As part of the efforts to enhance 
Somalia’s health system’s preparedness to handle the current burden of disease (including COVID-19), as well 
as future health emergencies, the proposed AF will finance the acquisition of essential supplies and commodities 
such as the procurement of pharmaceuticals, commodities, supplies, training and communications for essential 
health services (e.g., Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health (RMNCAH), NCDs). The 
financing will compensate for acute shortages, exacerbated by the COVID-19 shock, and a decline in donor 
financing to these areas.  This will provide support at the primary level of care in an effort to guarantee access 
to the most vulnerable population with particular attention to women and children. This includes ensuring the 
primary health care level is adequately equipped and supplied to serve as a first point of referral.  This will 
complement the Damal Caafimaad Project, which finances the delivery of essential health and nutrition services 
to enhance service coverage and quality in five selected regions, Nugaal (Puntland), Bakool (South West), Bay 
(South West), Hiraan and Middle Shebelle (Hirshabelle).  The proposed AF will provide financing for the purchase 
of equipment and supplies to support the service delivery in Damal Caafimaad areas and beyond based on an 
assessment of need and prioritization.   
 
32. 
Component 4.  Strengthening Solar-Powered Cold Chain (AF: US$3.0 million equivalent IDA).  This is a 
new component that will support energy efficient and solar-powered technology for cold chain and facility 
electrification. The component will complement existing electrification investments at primary health facilities 
to be made under the Somalia Electricity Access Project (P165497), by providing solar direct drive refrigerators 
as part of broader cold chain investments and not covered under SEAP’s solar electrification activities. Solar 
direct drive refrigerators is the industry standard for cold chain, and consistent electrification of health facilities 
at all levels is crucial for the provision of basic services. A Terms of Reference for the national scale electrification 
of health facilities has been developed to guide investments and identify the appropriate financing sources 
among the available project financing.  The Global Climate Fund Cooling Facility is planned to finance solar direct 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 79 
 
drive refrigerators and facility electrification, focusing on cooling facilities, in Damal Caafimaad project areas. 
This proposed AF will finance solar direct drive refrigerators and facility electrification in areas of the country 
not covered by the Damal Caafimaad Project. 
Table 3: Priority Groups for Vaccination in Somalia (March 31, 2022) 
Ranking of vulnerable 
group, or inclusion in 
which phase  
Population group  
   
Number of 
people  
 percent of 
population  
First  
Health care workers; border patrol staff, police, municipal 
workers, and teachers  
470,115 
3.0  
Second  
People with co-morbidities, elderly people (over 50 years 
old)  
2,758,013 
17.6  
   
Third  
All other adults over 18 years of age, including people with 
disabilities and IDPs  
4,293,726 
27.4  
Fourth  
All eligible below 18 years  
3,447,517 
22.0  
Total  
  
10,969,371 
70.0  
 
(ii) Financing Arrangements 
33. 
The increase in scope as outlined above will be reflected in an increase in indicative overall project 
allocation, from US$45.0 million to US$68.0 million equivalent.  Details of the allocation by component are in 
Table 4 below.   
Table 4: Project Cost and Financing (US$ Million Equivalent) 
 
Project Components 
Existing 
or New 
Parent 
Project 
AF 
Parent 
+ AF 
Total 
IDA 
HEPRTF Total 
Component 1 – Vaccine deployment and 
acquisition 
Existing 
31.0 
0.0 
3.0 
3.0 
34.0 
Sub-component 1.1. Transportation, supply chain and 
logistics capacity strengthening  
Existing 
11.0 
X 
x 
x 
11.0 
Sub-component 1.2. Social mobilization efforts 
Existing 
5.0 
X 
X 
X 
5.0 
Sub-component 1.3. Acquisition of additional Project 
COVID-19 vaccines  
Existing 
13.0 
X 
X 
X 
13.0 
Sub-component 1.4. Health care waste management  
Existing 
2.0 
X 
X 
X 
2.0 
Sub- component 1.5. Vaccine Deployment 
New 
3.0 
0.0 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
Component 2 – Implementation management 
Existing 
14.0 
2.5 
X 
2.5 
16.5 
Sub-component 2.1. Program Management Support  
Existing 
7.0 
X 
X 
X 
7.0 
Sub-component 2.2. Supervision, Coordination, Human 
Resources Management and Training  
Existing 
5.0 
2.5 
X 
2.5 
7.5 
Sub-component 2.3. Implementation Support:  
Existing 
2.0 
X 
X 
X 
2.0 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 79 
 
Component 3 - Continuity of Essential Health 
Services 
New 
n/a 
14.5 
X 
14.5 
14.5 
Sub-component 3.1. Strengthening of Critical Health 
Areas and Support Therapies 
New 
n/a 
12.5 
X 
12.5 
12.5 
Sub-component 3.2 Improving the Stocking and 
Procurement of Essential Supplies and Commodities 
across the Somalia Health System 
New 
n/a 
2.0 
X 
2.0 
2.0 
Component 4 – Strengthening solar-powered cold 
chain 
New 
n/a 
3.0 
X 
3.0 
3.0 
 TOTAL   
45.0 
 
20.0 
3.0 
 
23.0 
 
68.0 
Source: World Bank  
 
Table 5: Summary of COVID-19 Vaccine Sourcing and World Bank Financing 
World Bank Financed  
Specific vaccines 
and sourcing 
plans  
No. of Doses 
purchased with 
World Bank 
finance  
Estimated 
allocation of 
World Bank 
financing  
(US$ millions) 
Through COVAX  Through AVAT  
Through direct 
purchase  
From other 
sources  
  
  
  
  2.4 percent 
population 
covered, 
according to 
country 
expressed needs  
0 percent 
population 
covered  
 0 percent 
population 
covered  
 0.6 percent 
population 
covered  
Astra Zeneca 
Sinopharm 
0 
Purchase: US$0  
Deployment: 
US$11  
(parent project, 
P176956) 
17.6 percent 
population 
covered, 
according to 
country 
expressed needs 
0 percent 
population 
covered  
0 percent 
population 
covered  
0 percent 
population 
covered  
Astra Zeneca 
Sinopharm 
0 
Purchase: US$0  
Deployment: 
US$3  
(P178886)  
(This AF)  
0 percent 
population 
covered, 
according to 
country 
expressed needs  
 10 percent 
population 
covered  
 0 percent 
population 
covered  
 39.4 percent 
population 
covered  
J&J, Pfizer, 
AstraZeneca, 
Sinopharm, 
Sinovac 
1,600,000 
Purchase: 
US$13  (under 
parent project)  
Deployment: 
US$0   
(P178886) (This 
AF)  
*Other Sources refer to bilateral donors, mainly foreign governments. 
 
(iii) Changes in Institutional Arrangements for NDVP Implementation and Oversight 
 
34. 
The proposed AF will leverage shared key positions within the recently established Damal Caafimaad 
PCIU within the FMOH, which has been strengthened with additional key positions to support the parent 
project’s PCIU.  The PCIU is headed by the FMOH Director General who provides strategic guidance and 
oversight to the PCIU team.  The FMOH has assigned an acting project coordinator for the parent project who 
works in close coordination with the Senior Project Coordinator contracted for the Damal Caafimaad Project.  
Both coordinators share the management and oversight of key positions such as the Security Advisor, 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 79 
 
Procurement Specialist and Financial Management Specialist supporting both projects. The recruitment process 
for a dedicated Environmental Specialist and Social Specialist for the parent project is underway.  While these 
positions are being recruited under the COVID-19 project, the Environmental and Social Specialists already hired 
and on-board under the Damal Caafimaad Project will be responsible for the COVID-19 project environment and 
social safeguards.  Furthermore, the parent project will hire specific technical experts needed, including an 
immunization specialist.  The PCIU will handle financial management, procurement, Monitoring and Evaluation 
(M&E), and environmental and social safeguards arrangements and will oversee intergovernmental 
coordination between the FRS and FMS MOHs. A POM has been prepared for the parent project which describes 
the roles and responsibilities of key stakeholders and the monitoring, technical and operational arrangements 
under the Project. Furthermore, the institutional arrangements will leverage capacity of WHO and UNICEF which 
have been collaborating with the FMOH to provide continuous support for the implementation of the COVID-
19 vaccination program which will be under the overall responsibility of the FMOH and FMS MOHs. The 
institutional arrangements by component aim to ensure that the Government retains overall responsibility for 
the COVID-19 vaccination campaign while leveraging existing capacities of the UN agencies. 
 
(iv) Changes in the disbursement categories 
 
35. 
Changes in the disbursement categories will take place in accordance with the proposed activities under 
this proposed AF.   Specifically, in line with HEPRTF guidance, HEPR activities need to be in a separate sub-
component and HEPR funds need to have a separate disbursement category stipulated in the Disbursement 
Letter. 
 
(v) Results Framework 
36. 
New indicators are added to reflect the expanded scope of the project and monitor the gender gaps.  For 
parent project indicators, the baseline data will be revised where updated SHDS data is available. 
 
Box 3: Results Framework Modifications 
Modifications 
(None/New/Revised/Delete) 
PDO Indicators 
1. 
Percentage of population fully vaccinated, which is included in the priority population targets defined in 
the national plan (disaggregated by sex) (Percentage)  
Revised 
2. 
Percentage of pregnant women who received at least four ante-natal care (ANC) consultations  
New 
3. 
Percentage of children aged 12-23 months who received basic vaccinations (BCG, measles, and three 
doses each of DPT and polio vaccine (excluding polio vaccine given at birth) 
New  
(*) 
Intermediate Indicators 
 
Component 1  
 
4. 
Percentage of the population which expresses acceptance of COVID-19 vaccines 
(disaggregated by sex)  
Revised 
 
5. 
Percentage of vaccine doses administered against allocations, by state. 
Revised 
 
6. 
Number of social mobilization campaigns on COVID-19 vaccination  
Revised 
 
7. 
Number of Effective Vaccine Management (EVM) assessments completed with 
composite scores of 80 percent or higher. 
Revised 
 
8. 
Number of AEFI systems put in place and capable of reporting adverse effects. 
Revised  
 
9. 
Number of Points of Entry staff trained on screening and management of suspected 
COVID-19 cases 
10. Number of vaccination centers with a female vaccinator present 
New 
 
 
New  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 79 
 
Component 2 
11. Number of training attended by healthcare workers (including community health 
workers) on climate shock emergency preparedness and response 
New  
 
GBV 
12. Number of Gender-Based Violence (GBV) and SEA/SH cases identified by frontline 
health workers and reported to the appropriate departments for national support  
 
13. Number of vaccinators trained on GBV/SEA/SH (disaggregated by sex) 
New 
 
 
New   
CE 
14. Number of beneficiaries reporting that community engagement and outreach meet their 
needs  
 
15. Number of complaints to the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) satisfactorily 
addressed 
New  
 
 
New 
Gen 
16. Gender-sensitive educational materials developed for public communications and 
advocacy, in accordance with demand plan (Yes/No) 
 
New 
 
Component 3  
 
17. Number of health facilities designated with sufficient equipment and medical supplies to 
provide essential care 
 
18. Number of people who have received essential health, nutrition, and population (HNP 
Services) - Corporate Results Indicator (CRI)  
New  
 
 
New  
 
 
 
Component 4  
19. Percentage of vaccination sites with functional solar-powered cold chain  
 
20. Number of women trained on the installation, monitoring and maintenance of the cold 
chain equipment  
New 
 
 
New   
 
 
 
(*) Numbers in the brackets refers to the component being monitored by the indicator; CE= indicator on citizen engagement; Gen = Gender; 
GBV = indicator related to GBV/SEA/SH. 
B. Sustainability 
 
37. 
The FRS is strongly committed to the COVID-19 vaccination program and improvement of service 
delivery to strengthen vaccination coverage, which augurs well for its sustainability.  The proposed AF will play 
a catalytic role, providing urgently needed funds to train health care workers, distribute the vaccines, and create 
a positive environment for other partners to promote the program. The training is critical, given the weakness 
in the system. The national and state-level stakeholders are being mobilized to bolster commitment. Further, 
the UN partners are heavily involved in the program and will help strengthen the institutions involved. 
 
III. 
KEY RISKS 
 
38. 
The overall risk to achieving the PDO is “Substantial”. The expanded scope of the project in support of 
the continuity of essential health services presents a risk. While mitigation measures have been identified, the 
residual risks remain important as discussed below. The proposed AF faces four major risks which are rated 
High, namely political and governance, technical design, institutional capacity for implementation and 
sustainability, and fiduciary. The other risks are all rated as substantial.  
 
39. 
Political and governance: High. The recently completed elections in May 2022 will bring transition across 
the Government, which may also impact the MOH leadership positions. To mitigate these risks, the proposed 
AF will build and leverage on mitigation measures being put in place for the parent project and in the context 
of the Damal Caafimaad Project which will be managed by the same PCIU. This includes supporting regular 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 79 
 
consultations and stakeholder engagement at the technical level between the FRS and FMS to ensure continuity 
in activities during politically unstable periods; and assisting the FMOH to strengthen fiduciary capacity, 
including use of standardized mechanisms used across the World Bank’s Somalia portfolio. In addition, the 
proposed AF will engage experienced UN agencies, such as WHO, UNICEF, and UNOPS, who all have a sound 
record of supporting the COVID-19 vaccination program and essential health services particularly in fragile 
contexts.  
 
40. 
Technical Design: High. There are inherent high risks in the design of the proposed AF. Risks stemming 
from the surge of variants and the current recommendation for booster shots and the potential need for more, 
therefore requiring re-prioritization of the existing vaccine supply.  Furthermore, the two new components 
being introduced in the AF will entail civil works at existing health establishments and an expanded scope to 
support the continuity of essential health services. These risks are considered high and have potential 
repercussions for the timely availability and deployment of vaccines and for ensuring works are completed in a 
timely manner. Several actions can be taken to mitigate the risk, including working through the COVAX Facility 
as well as the AU-AVAT mechanism to ensure the latest technical guidance and strategy is used for prioritizing 
the vaccine deployment.  On civil works, experienced agencies such as UNOPS will be engaged to support the 
Government with the renovations and refurbishments.  
 
41. 
Institutional Capacity: High. Institutional and management capacity at the FMOH is modest. The 
Government’s fiscal situation severely impedes its ability to mobilize resources, resulting in a heavy dependence 
on external financing. The VIRAT/VRAF assessment highlighted key gaps that need to be addressed for effective 
deployment of the COVID-19 vaccines. To mitigate these risks and facilitate a swift rollout of the vaccine 
program, the Government and the World Bank have agreed to contract key activities to the WHO and UNICEF 
while building FMOH oversight capacity. The two agencies have been working with the Government to support 
the national COVID-19 health response and are well positioned to provide support and continuity. The 
Government has gained experience in contracting activities/services under the COVID-19 CERC of the SCRP and 
will now leverage this capacity to expand the scope and mandate of the two UN agencies. Moreover, the 
recently approved Damal Caafimaad Project will bolster overall institutional capacity at the FMOH and the FMS 
with potential synergies and cost efficiencies of implementing the proposed AF though the same PCIU.  
 
42. 
Fiduciary: High. Financial management challenges at the FMOH may affect the proposed AF. The recent 
experience related to the staffing requirements under the parent project pointed to the need for substantial 
support in handling financial management and procurement.  On financial management, the lack of allocated 
budget for the COVID-19 parent project presents a risk to being able to move forward with implementation.  
This was not done as the Government budget was not approved.  On procurement, the risks are related to 
delayed contracting of key safeguards positions.  These risks are being addressed by the Bank team having 
provided step-by-step guidance to the PCIU on next immediate steps to advance contracting and hirings.  The 
budget allocation is being discussed at a high-level between the MOH leadership and Ministry of Finance to 
provide needed resources for implementation.  On procurement, the World Bank team has provided hands-on 
technical and fiduciary support to advance delayed contracting which have begun to advance.    
 
43. 
Macroeconomic: Substantial. The macro-economic risks are substantial due to limited capacity of the 
Government to respond to external shocks and modest fiscal space. Given that the economy’s mainstay is 
agriculture, climate shocks could lower output, damage infrastructure, exacerbate water stress, displace people, 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 79 
 
and disrupt services. The key mitigation of macro-fiscal risks is the ongoing support from development partners, 
including the International Monetary Fund (IMF), to expand revenue mobilization.  
 
44. 
Sector Strategy and Policies: Substantial. While various strategies, policies, and plans (e.g., National 
Deployment and Vaccination Plan, National Vaccine Coverage and Purchase Plan, Priority Groups for 
Vaccination) have been elaborated, the recent decision by the FMOH expanded the COVID-19 targeted 
populations to pregnant women in the second trimester and adolescents 12 years of age may require refined 
targeting strategies in line with global technical guidance. In addition, the surge of new variants and guidance 
on the need for additional booster doses may also require the deployment plan to be updated.  To mitigate any 
risks of delays, the World Bank will coordinate with other partners (WHO, UNICEF, GAVI) to assist authorities 
with the vaccination strategy to ensure both the original and expanded target populations continue to be 
prioritized in line with latest technical recommendations.  
 
45. 
Environmental and Social: Substantial. There are additional environmental and social risks associated 
with Component 3’s scope of works, including major renovations/civil works of six (6) hospitals and the fact that 
the people under 18 years are now part of the vaccination target. The potential environmental risks include: (i) 
risks emanating from vaccine storage, transportation and vaccine cold chain logistics; (ii) occupational health 
and safety risks involving medical workers involved in the vaccination program (e.g. risk of disease transmission); 
and (iii) increased pollution due to inadequate waste management (e.g. haphazard use and disposal of 
disinfectants, masks, and gloves, untreated medical and hazardous waste, increased air pollution by medical 
waste incineration). Given the accelerated vaccine deployment strategy planned for the country, a substantial 
increase in the amount of glass, plastic and rubber residues from vaccine containers is anticipated, which may 
threaten local ecosystems and place a heavy burden on the country which has limited resources for waste 
management. There is also a possibility for infectious microorganisms to be introduced into the environment if 
they are not contained within laboratories or quarantine facilities due to accidents/emergencies (e.g. fires or 
natural disasters, such as floods). Social risks include: (i) conflict and security risks based two factors: (a) possible 
opposition to the vaccination program by radicalized armed groups such as Al Shabaab and other conservative 
interests, and (b) restricted access to rural populations, which in turn is impacted by limited numbers of 
healthcare workers in non-urban areas; (ii) potential risks of increased social tension in the community given 
vaccination hesitancy and misinformation about vaccinations; (iii) potential exclusion of disadvantaged and 
vulnerable groups (e.g. IDPs or minority groups) from project benefits and elite capture, both in service delivery 
and recruitment in a challenging cultural context with important familial ties.; (iv) labor risks including poor 
terms and conditions of working and redress, particularly regular payments and overtime and time off; (v) 
contextual risks of operating in a conflict zone; (vi) potential risks of sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment 
(SEAH), and other forms of GBV; and (vii) a complex social context where challenges exist in conducting effective 
and inclusive community consultations, stakeholder engagement, community participation and safety of staff, 
developing effective and trusted grievance mechanisms due to difficulty in accessing rural areas, and the 
collective nature of traditional complaints handling. Grievance management is constrained by lack of trust in 
service providers to resolve grievances confidentially and protect whistle blowers, particularly for vulnerable 
and marginalized groups.  To this end, the proposed AF will continue to apply robust series of mitigation 
measures  to address  project-induced GBV/SEAH risks for both the construction and operation component of 
the project, including: (i) Update all the safeguard documents (ESMF, SEAH prevention and response plan, LMP, 
SMF) to address the above issues; (ii) All safeguard requirements incorporated into UN contracts to ensure 
sufficient monitoring of safeguard issues, monitored by PCIU Environmental and Social Specialists; (iii) To 
manage the risk of construction, a maximum of 10 workers will be present in a functioning hospital and will not 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 79 
 
have unaccompanied access to functioning areas of the hospital where there are women and girls; (iv) All 
workers will be required to sign codes of conduct with GBV/SEAH-related protections and have orientation on 
SEAH; (v) Female health workers will be present during vaccinations of women; (vi) community consultations, 
sensitization and capacity building activities to raise awareness of potential risks of GBV/SEAH, with the 
availability of nearby services mapped out; and (vii) Strengthening of the Grievance Mechanism (GM) with 
procedures and channels to enable timely, safe, confidential and ethical reporting of  incidents.  
 
46. 
Stakeholder: Substantial. Vaccine hesitancy is a major risk in Somalia, given widespread perceptions that 
the pandemic is under control and considering stigma and rumors associated with COVID-19. Stakeholder 
engagement and strong behavior change communication will be critical to address these risks. Virtual 
communication with key stakeholders and representatives of disadvantaged and marginalized groups including 
women, IDPs, minority groups, and nomadic pastoralists will be necessary. The NVDP includes a multi-prong 
demand generation and community engagement strategy to improve awareness and knowledge of COVID-19 
vaccine, increase trust, and reduce misinformation by: (a) mobilizing key stakeholders (e.g., faith leaders, local 
authorities, social media); (b) tracking rumors; (c) introducing two-way conversations at community level; (d) 
training of health and community workers and media; and (e) establishing a hotline where people can call in 
privately.  
 
47. 
There are also access barriers for different stakeholders, whereby some may face geographic or cultural 
impediments. Access barriers will require putting in place a well targeted strategy that is tailored to different 
stakeholders and reflects the highly variable conditions in different states, considering both demand and supply 
side impediments. Special attention will be given to ensuring that females have equitable access to vaccines 
through women-friendly platforms and tailored communication materials, given the various barriers they face 
to accessing health services (e.g., limited access to trustworthy information; inability to travel to health centers 
on their own if husbands are not supportive; or increased exposure to harm if they need to travel long distances 
to access health facilities, particularly in insecure areas). Health workers in both public and private facilities, 
together with medical associations and female health workers (funded under RCRF) who are leading by example 
and actively promoting vaccination among priority groups, via house-to-house visits and supporting with 
information materials are expected to play a key role. Furthermore, a tailored strategy will be used for reducing 
access barriers for IDPs and ensuring they have equitable access to vaccines.  
 
48. 
Occupational safety and health concerns will require ensuring that terms and conditions of employment 
are adequate and redress mechanisms are in place and are functional to ensure personnel is adequately 
protected. To this end, Labor Management Procedures will outline fair treatment, non-discriminatory and equal 
opportunity policies for health workers and contractors and to address child labor, to be reflected in labor 
management plans. Likewise, appropriate prevention measures will need to be taken during vaccination 
campaigns such as social distancing and mask wearing to protect both health staff and people being vaccinated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 79 
 
IV. 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis 
 
49. 
The outbreak of COVID-19 two years ago has devastated many countries and even the strongest 
economies have suffered significant economic losses. For Somalia, macroeconomic situations have never been 
direr with more than two-thirds of its population living in poverty and a third in need of humanitarian 
assistance15.Without purposeful planning to optimize Somalia’s human capital potential, global as well as 
national efforts and achievements made to rebuild the economy would not be as effective.  
50. 
Growth rates of Somalia’s economy remain substantially below the pre-COVID-19 level of 3.2 percent. 
Weak health system; low vaccination rates (of 12.1 percent and 8.1 percent for single and double dose 
recipients, respectively); wide fluctuations in confirmed COVID-19 cases and deaths; underreporting of COVID-
19 cases and deaths as well as limited testing for the virus, blur human capital prospects for the country. 
Economic growth, both in the short- and long-term, is contingent on the productivity of human capital. Foreign 
direct investment in productive sectors of the economy is discouraged by the low quality of Somalian human 
capital, explained by the wide learning poverty gap, poor nutrition and low levels of immunity accumulated over 
the years. It is, therefore, imperative that pragmatic steps be taken towards improving health outcomes, 
ensuring continuous economic activities, and avoiding school closures again in Somalia. While augmenting 
health spending to strengthen curative healthcare in Somalia, spending on preventive healthcare particularly 
COVID-19 vaccination rollouts should be adequately financed as both are quintessential for solid human capital 
development as well as Somalia’s economic future.  
51. 
The successful deployment of COVID-19 vaccines in Somalia represents the best option for saving lives, 
protecting livelihoods, and restoring growth with benefits expected to exceed vaccine-related costs.  The 
effective administration of COVID-19 vaccines will also avoid the health care costs of additional cases of infection 
and protect the modest gains made in recent years in essential health services.   
52. 
The value added of the World Bank's support to Somalia is three-fold and substantial.  First, World Bank 
financing is expected to play a major role in building the national health care delivery system in this fragile 
context where most development partners provide humanitarian assistance and where both governments and 
NGOs depend heavily on external financing.  Second, World Bank technical assistance, working in close 
collaboration with other agencies (i.e., UNICEF, WHO) will be critical to guiding and informing the roll out of the 
COVID-19 vaccination program which requires regular information on vaccine acquisition strategies and 
opportunities.  Third, as noted above, Somalia’s participation in the MPA will provide numerous opportunities 
for learning and knowledge sharing with the other participating countries.  The learning agenda is substantial 
and includes a wide range of issues around vaccine readiness assessments, risk communications, and 
performance monitoring. 
 
15 Braam, Dorien H., Sharath Srinivasan, Luke Church, Zakaria Sheikh, Freya L. Jephcott, and Salome Bukachi. 2021. “Lockdowns, lives 
and livelihoods: the impact of COVID-19 and public health responses to conflict affected populations - a remote qualitative study in 
Baidoa and Mogadishu, Somalia.” Conflict and Health 15:47. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 79 
 
B. Financial Management 
53. 
Financial Management. The initial FM risk was assessed as High, with the residual FM risk assessed as 
Substantial. Financial management capacity challenges that are likely to affect the project include lack of key 
financial management competencies and internal controls, reliance on consultants, and lack of regulatory 
framework for key Public Financial Management (PFM) aspects. Various mitigation measures have been 
identified, both specific to the project and as part of other World Bank/Donor engagements in the country. 
Given the consideration for Use of Country Systems (UCS), the Project will adopt the UCS in various aspects of 
the project’s financial management including accounting and reporting, banking, oversight arrangements with 
the Office of the Auditor General and staffing. The Project will leverage the recently established PCIU within the 
MOH to ensure strong ownership of the Government’s COVID-19 vaccination program and to promote close 
coordination with activities to be funded under the forthcoming health sector operation. The External 
Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS) already established under the Office of the Accountant General and staffed 
with mainstream civil servants, in consultation with the PCIU to be in the FMOH, will oversee and manage the 
project financial management (Figure 1). The EAFS units have been fully operational at the FRS for the last six 
years (Figure 2). Throughout the implementation of the Project, the Government is expected to ensure the EAFS 
and PCIU are staffed with a team of professionals with relevant and adequate qualification and experience 
acceptable to the World Bank. The residual FM risk rating is therefore considered Substantial. 
 
54. 
The Government will prepare a detailed budget based on the specific activities to be executed over the 
life of the project. Initially, this will cover activities to be implemented in the FMS. This budget will be agreed 
with the World Bank for it to be included in the Government Appropriations and the relevant sector within the 
FRS budget. Monitoring of budget execution will be done through regular submission of quarterly reports to the 
World Bank.  The PCIU will be responsible for preparation, consolidation of the project annual work plan and 
budget. The work plan and budget will be presented to the National Vaccine Coordination Committee for COVID-
19 for review and approval. The activities, funding eligibility criteria, implementation arrangements, 
accountability, monitoring, reporting and oversight arrangements will be detailed in the POM. 
 
55. 
Financial Reporting and audit. The FRS will prepare a consolidated Interim Unaudited Financial Reports 
(IFRs) and submit to the World Bank not later than 45 days after the end of the quarter. The quarterly reports 
will provide details on all funds received under the Project as well as any counterpart funds received under the 
project. These reports will be generated from the Government’s Integrated Financial Management Information 
System (IFMIS) and will form the basis for funds replenishment. Annual project financial reports will also be 
prepared and submitted to the Auditor General for audit within three months after the end of the financial year. 
Each of the three UN agencies will submit quarterly interim financial reports to the PCIU within 30 days of the 
end of the quarter to facilitate review and integration before submission of a consolidated IFR to the Bank within 
45 days after the end of the quarter. The financial reports will be generated from the FM systems maintained 
by the UN agencies to provide reasonable assurance over their accuracy and completeness.  
 
56. 
Flow of Funds and Disbursements. The project will open a Designated Account in the Central Bank of 
Somalia where funds from the World Bank will be channelled following submission of Withdrawal Applications 
accompanied by cash forecast based on the approved budget. Subsequent withdrawal of funds will be based on 
accountability for previous advances as reflected in the quarterly interim unaudited financial reports. Detailed 
disbursements arrangements will be reflected in the Disbursement and Financial Information Letter (DFIL). 
Disbursements to each of the three UN agencies will be based on UN advance method in line with the payment 
schedule in the agreement signed with FRS. Accountability for the funds disbursed will be monitored through 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 79 
 
the quarterly interim financial reports submitted to the FRS and the World Bank. Any unutilized funds upon 
completion of all project activities will be refunded to the World Bank.  
 
Figure 1: Flow of Funds  Mechanisms 
 
 
57. 
External Audit. The Auditor General will carry out Project External Audits with support of technical 
assistance. An external audit firm will be engaged and funded by the Project to carry out the audit of the project 
activities. The audited project financial statements together with any additional information required will be 
submitted to the World Bank no later than six months after the end of the financial year (see Annex 3, Table 7 
. The audit will be in conformity with the World Bank’s audit requirements and in accordance with internationally 
recognized auditing standards. The World Bank’s audit requirements are expected to be fulfilled through the 
normal audit functions of WHO, UNOPS and UNICEF’s own External Auditors in line with the Single Audit 
World Bank 
FMS 
EAFS/Treasuries 
EAFS Unit within 
FRS  
(Office of the 
Accountant 
Withdrawal applications  
DA-CBS 
UNICEF 
(New 
York) 
WHO 
(Geneva) 
Banking 
Data 
UNICEF 
Somalia 
WHO 
Somalia 
Project Accounts  
FMSs 
Banking 
Data
Contractors, beneficiaries, and vendors payments 
Direct payments  
Direct 
Disbursements 
Direct Disbursements  
Reports & requests 
Payments 
Payments 
Payments 
Transfers 
Disbursements 
Transfers 
Transfers 
Payments 
Disbursement Requests 
UNOPS 
Somalia 
UNOPS 
(Copenhagen) 
Transfers 
Direct Disbursements  
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 79 
 
Principle observed by UN agencies in general.  The internal audit functions of each of the three UN agencies will 
also provide effective fiduciary oversight of funds disbursed to the UN agencies.  
58. 
For additional information on FM arrangements pertaining to the engagement of UNOPs support in 
renovation and refurbishment of health facilities, please see Annex 3. 
C. Procurement 
59. 
Procurement for the proposed AF will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s Procurement 
Regulations for IPF Borrowers for Goods, Works, Non-Consulting and Consulting Services, dated November 
2020 and as revised from time to time. As with the parent project and first additional financing, the AF2 will be 
subject to the World Bank’s Anticorruption Guidelines, dated October 15, 2006, revised in January 2011, and as 
of July 1, 2016. The project will use the Systematic tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) to plan, record, 
and track procurement transactions. and the provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement.  
 
60. 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) and Procurement Plan (PP). The preparation of 
the PPSD has been deferred to the implementation stage in accordance with paragraph A.3 in Section III of the 
World Bank Guidance: “Procurement in Situations of Urgent need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints.” 
 
61. 
Procurement implementation arrangements. The existing implementation arrangements of the parent 
project will be maintained and strengthened under the proposed AF. The PCIU for the World Bank funded health 
operation (Damal Caafimaad) within the FMOH will be responsible in the implementation of the project. The 
PCIU is already staffed with a Senior Project Coordinator and a Procurement Specialist (whose performance has 
been satisfactory) among other staff. The team is not yet conversant with the World Bank Procurement 
Regulations and are still learning. Under the proposed AF, support will continue to be provided by the Bank by 
conducting training aimed towards addressing procurement capacity issues for the PCIU/technical 
department/stakeholders.   
 
62. 
Procurement management risk is assessed as High. The procurement environment in Somalia remains 
challenging. The main procurement associated risks are: (i) limited number of competent procurement staff; (ii) 
weak capacity of bidders and limited service providers; (iii) high price bids/ proposals due to security conditions 
in some parts of the country; (iv) fraud and corruption; (v) collusion among bidders due to limited competition; 
(vi) inadequate experience in procurement planning, monitoring and contract management; (vii) delays in 
procurement implementation should COVID-19 crisis remain prolonged due to disruptions in supply chains 
resulting in price volatility and unavailability of items; and (viii) weak legal and financial institutions (Commercial 
Banks and insurance agencies are not well established) and (ix) lack of enforcement of Public Regulatory 
Framework (oversight institutions not in place, the procurement management unit not formalized and 
complaint handling body not in place). 
 
63. 
The residual rating of the project remains “Substantial” in view of the proposed mitigation measures. 
Proposed mitigation measures include: (a) ensuring that PCIU has always in place a dedicated Procurement 
Specialist with relevant qualification and experience acceptable to the World Bank as well as ensuring that the 
POM includes a well-documented step by step  procurement management process; (b) all procurement 
activities regardless of value, nature, categories or packages will be treated as prior review and reviewed by the 
World Bank;  (c) training of the project staff by the World Bank on the New Procurement Regulations (d) creating 
awareness among the Government, private sector and other stakeholders on the key issues regarding integrity 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 79 
 
in procurement and financial management (e) supporting procurement reforms (f) application of flexibilities 
provided by the World Bank’s Procurement Framework (g) encourage international firms to have joint venture 
with local firms due to insecurity and (h) involving a Probity Advisor in the procurement process where 
appropriate. 
 
64. 
Main procurement activities. In view of the emergency nature of the Project activities and fragility of the 
country, the most appropriate procedures for procurement of COVID-19 related goods and services and 
technical assistance services under the proposed AF would be Direct Selection of UN agencies, NGOs and/or 
private sectors vendors.  The proposed AF will contract experienced UN agencies such as WHO, UNICEF and 
UNOPS. WHO and UNICEF will provide technical and operational support to the FMOH to ensure equitable 
access to COVID-19 vaccines. UNOPS will be contracted to support the work on renovation and rehabilitation of 
health facilities. The Government will also hire an external firm to provide oversight to the management and 
implementation of the hospital rehabilitation works conducted by UNOPS. 
 
65. 
Country procurement approaches will utilize the flexibility provided by the World Bank’s Procurement 
Framework to fast-track emergency procurement under the proposed AF. Key measures to fast-track 
procurement include: (a) use of simple and fast procurement and selection methods fit for an emergency 
situation, including direct contracting, as appropriate; (b) streamlined competitive procedures with shorter 
bidding times; and (c) procurement from UN agencies enabled and expedited by World Bank procedures and 
templates. 
 
66. 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP). The World Bank’s STEP system will continue to 
be used to prepare, clear, and update PPs and conduct all procurement transactions for the Project. Staff of the 
PCIU have already been trained on how to use the STEP system.   
D. Legal Operational Policies 
. . 
 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
No 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 
No 
. . 
E. Environmental and Social 
67. 
           The environmental risks for the project are rated as Substantial. The likely environmental risks and 
impacts include substantial occupational health and safety (OHS) risks that healthcare workers working on the 
COVID-19 vaccination rollout are likely to encounter. Other environmental risks include increased community 
exposure to infection and healthcare waste management risks posed due to significant capacity constraints. In 
addition, there are likely to be risks emanating from vaccine storage and transportation and the general 
environmental impacts of vaccine cold chain logistics. It is also noteworthy that the client is relatively 
inexperienced in management of environmental risks in health project settings and has limited technical 
(including staff) and institutional capacity.  
68. 
There is expectations of an increase of medical waste, hazardous use and disposal of disinfectants, masks, 
and gloves, and the burden of untreated waste. This will pose new environmental risks. Following the 
accelerated campaign of vaccine deployment planned countrywide, a substantial increase in the amount of 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 of 79 
 
glass, plastic and rubber residues from vaccine containers is anticipated. The sharp increase in the amount of 
medical and hazardous waste due to the projected widespread use of masks, especially by workers 
administering the vaccines, may also threaten local ecosystems during the pandemic. There are also additional 
risks from the use of fossil fuels (including diesel) for provision of off-grid power to refrigerate vaccines – risks 
of exudates from fuel containers and subsequent contamination of soil systems and groundwater resources. 
The burden generated will be particularly great for low-income Somalia, which has little resources for waste 
management, with detrimental short and long-term environmental impacts. Environmental risks and their 
mitigation measures will be articulated in the project’s ESMF, which is under preparation. The medical wastes 
likely to be generated by the project will be mitigated using the procedures described in the IPC-WMP for the 
project, as well as in area-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). 
 
69. 
The social risk is rated as High taking into account the following key risks and impacts: (a) conflict and 
security risks for workers and communities due to opposition to the vaccination program by radicalized armed 
groups and other conservative interests, increased social tension given vaccination hesitancy and 
misinformation, and the impact and conduct of security personnel; (b) potential exclusion of disadvantaged and 
vulnerable groups from project benefits and elite capture, both in service delivery and recruitment of workers; 
(c) labor risks including poor terms and conditions and lack of functional grievance redress; (d) contextual 
challenges in conducting effective and inclusive community consultations; and (e) communicating to a range of 
groups including disadvantaged groups with different concerns about vaccination, levels of literacy and 
accessibility to mainstream media. Grievance management is constrained by lack of trust in service providers to 
resolve grievances confidentially and protect whistle blowers.  
 
70. 
Environmental and social risks and mitigation measures are articulated in the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) for the Project, as well as in area-specific Environmental and Social 
Management Plans (ESMPs), which was disclosed on May 30, 2022. The Stakeholder Engagement Plans (SEPs) 
will outline procedures to identify key stakeholders, including vulnerable and marginalized group 
representatives to ensure inclusive and transparent consultation processes throughout the project cycle before 
implementation begins. The SEPs, will include a description of a Project Grievance Mechanism (GM) which will 
link to mechanisms at the point of service and will have separate and confidential mechanisms for receiving 
complaints of sexual exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment and other forms of gender-based violence 
and established protocols to enable survivor-centered responses. The GM will also link to wider beneficiary 
feedback mechanisms that would look at service standards, beneficiary satisfaction, and other citizen 
engagement tools. Risks related to infection prevention and control and medical waste will be mitigated through 
measures articulated in the IPC Waste Management Plan (IPC-WMP). The ESMF will be updated prior to 
disbursement for Component 3 outlining how environmental and social risks will be mitigated for the new 
components.  These measures will be detailed in contractor-specific ESMPs and area specific ESMPs as part of 
the integrated vaccination roll out plans.  The plans will assess key stakeholder groups including disadvantaged 
groups and how they will be reached in information dissemination, stakeholder feedback and the grievance 
mechanism. LMP will outline fair treatment, non-discrimination and equal opportunity of project workers and 
contractors and OHS and child and forced labor requirements for other categories of workers and will be 
reflected in contractors LMPs. A security management framework will outline the way in which security is 
managed, and security risk assessments and management plans will be developed for each phase of vaccination 
roll out by an accredited security risk management firm.  
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing for Somalia COVID-19 Emergency Vaccination Project (P178886) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 of 79 
 
Gender Analysis 
71. 
Gender Gap. Somalia has one of the highest gender inequality indices (GII)16 in the world at close to 0.8 
(2021), ranking fourth worldwide in terms of gender disparities. Somalia ranks sixth globally, with one of the 
highest maternal mortality rate (MMR) of 692 per 100,000 live births in the world (SHDS, 2020). Most of these 
deaths are preventable. Gender disparities in Somalia are characterized by limited access to formal education, 
high rates of GBV, as well as a nearly universal prevalence of female genital mutilation (FGM) at 99.2 percent 
prevalence among women. By 14 years of age, almost all girls have experienced FGM, with little variation across 
age and education groups. Women also face barriers to formal economic participation. Seventy five percent of 
women have received no education17. Gender inequalities and norms are critical considerations when designing 
policies and interventions in emergency situations and pandemics. They play an important role in who gets 
access to essential health services and how fast. Gender norms also influence the risk of exposure to disease, as 
well as of spreading it. At the same time, biological sex can influence how susceptible a person is to disease and 
how well they respond to treatment and/or vaccines. Women are often impeded from fully accessing health 
and education services, and benefitting from employment opportunities, leaving many with limited autonomy 
and heavy dependence on spouses. This is further exacerbated by conflict, insecurity, and widespread poverty, 
which leave women disproportionately vulnerable to gender-based violence.  
 
72. 
Evidence from previous infectious disease outbreaks indicates that men and women are often 
differentially affected, with women impacted more negatively than men. The effects of COVID-19 will likely 
exacerbate pre-existing gender differences.18 Gender gaps are affected differently depending on the context 
and specific characteristics of different groups of women.  Risk