 
 
Document of 
The World Bank 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD5187  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT PAPER 
ON A  
PROPOSED SECOND ADDITIONAL GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 39 MILLION 
(US$50 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
FROM THE CRISIS RESPONSE WINDOW - EARLY RESPONSE FINANCING 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
 
FOR THE 
SOMALIA URBAN RESILIENCE PROJECT PHASE II  
 
 
December 8, 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
Urban, Resilience, and Land Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
 
 
  
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(Exchange Rate Effective October 31, 2022) 
 
Currency Unit  =   US$ 
SDR 0.77924709  = US$1 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 – December 31 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
AF 
Additional Financing 
BRA 
Benadir Regional Administration 
CCCM 
Camp Coordination and Camp Management 
CERC 
Contingent Emergency Response Component 
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework 
CRW 
Crisis Response Window 
CWG 
Cash Working Group 
DA 
Designated Account 
DRFPP 
Drought Response and Famine Prevention Plan 
E&S 
Environmental and Social 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
ECT 
Emergency Cash Transfer 
EFA 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
ERF 
Early Response Financing 
ERR 
Economic Rate of Return 
ESCP 
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan 
ESF 
Environmental and Social Framework 
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
ESS 
Environmental and Social Standards 
EU 
European Union 
FCDO 
Foreign, Commonwealth, and Development Office 
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 
FEWSNET 
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMS 
Federal Member State 
GBV 
Gender-Based Violence 
GEMS 
Geo-Enabling Initiative for Monitoring Services 
GRC 
Grievance Redress Committee 
GRM 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service 
HLP 
Housing, Land, and Property 
IDP 
Internally Displaced Person 
IFR 
Interim Financial Report 
IOM 
International Organization for Migration 
 
 
 
IPs 
Implementing Partners 
ISM 
Implementation Support Mission 
ISR 
Implementation Status and Results Report 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MoLSA 
Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs 
MoPW 
Ministry of Public Works 
MPF 
Multi-Partner Fund 
MRP 
Minimum Response Package 
NGO 
Nongovernmental Organization 
NPV 
Net Present Value 
O&M 
Operation and Maintenance 
OHS 
Occupational Health and Safety 
PA 
Project Account 
PAD 
Project Appraisal Document 
PCU 
Project Coordination Unit 
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
PFM 
Public Financial Management 
PIM 
Project Implementation Manual 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development 
SCRP 
Somalia Crisis Recovery Project 
SEA 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
SEAH 
Sexual Exploitation, Abuse, and Harassment 
SH 
Sexual Harassment 
SMPF 
Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
SODMA 
Somalia Disaster Management Agency 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
SURP 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
ToC 
Theory of Change 
TPM 
Third-Party Monitoring 
TPMA 
Third-Party Monitoring Agent 
UN 
United Nations 
UNHCR 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
UNOPS 
United Nations Office for Project Services 
WASH 
Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene 
WBG 
World Bank Group 
WFP 
World Food Programme 
 
Regional Vice President: Victoria Kwakwa 
Country Director: Keith E. Hansen 
Regional Director: Ayat Soliman 
Practice Manager: Peter D. Ellis 
Task Team Leader: Makiko Watanabe 
 
 
 
SOMALIA 
 
SOMALIA URBAN RESILIENCE PROJECT PHASE II SECOND ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
I. 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING ........................................ 8 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING .................................................................... 14 
III. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 28 
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................................. 32 
V.  WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS .............................................................................. 40 
VI    SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES ..................................................................................... 41 
VII   DETAILED CHANGE(S) .................................................................................................... 41 
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 46 
 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 1 of 59 
 
       
BASIC INFORMATION – PARENT (Somalia Urban Resilience Project II - P170922) 
 
 
Country 
Product Line 
Team Leader(s) 
Somalia 
IBRD/IDA 
Makiko Watanabe 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Resp CC 
Req CC 
Practice Area (Lead) 
P170922 
Investment Project 
Financing 
SAEU3 (10208) AECE2 (6542) 
Urban, Resilience and Land 
  
Implementing Agency: Baidoa Municipality/South West State, BeletWeyne/Hirshabelle, Benadir Regional 
Administration, Dhusamareeb/Galgaduud, Garowe Municipality/ Puntland, Kismayo Municipality/Jubbaland, Ministry 
of Public Works 
 ADD FIN TBL1 
Is this a regionally tagged 
project? 
 
No 
 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
 
No 
 
Approval Date 
Closing Date 
Expected 
Guarantee 
Expiration Date 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
09-Dec-2019 
31-Dec-2026  
High 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Parent 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach [MPA] 
[✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 2 of 59 
 
Development Objective(s) 
 
To strengthen public service delivery capacity of local governments, increase access to climate-resilient urban 
infrastructure and services, and to provide immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or emergency in 
selected areas. 
 
Ratings (from Parent ISR) 
 RATING_DRAFT_
NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation 
Latest ISR 
 
22-Jul-2020 
26-Jan-2021 
07-Jul-2021 
20-Dec-2021 
28-Jun-2022 
29-Nov-2022 
Progress towards 
achievement of 
PDO 
MS 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Overall 
Implementation 
Progress (IP) 
MS 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Overall ESS 
Performance 
S 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Overall Risk 
H 
 
H 
 
H 
 
H 
 
H 
 
H 
 
Financial 
Management 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Project 
Management 
S 
 
S 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Procurement 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
S 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
S 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional 
Financing - P179775) 
 
ADDFIN_TABLE 
Project ID 
Project Name 
Additional Financing Type 
Urgent Need or Capacity 
Constraints 
P179775 
Somalia Urban Resilience 
Project Phase II Second 
Restructuring, Scale Up 
Yes 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 3 of 59 
 
Additional Financing 
Financing instrument 
Product line 
Approval Date 
Investment Project 
Financing 
IBRD/IDA 
22-Dec-2022 
Projected Date of Full 
Disbursement 
Bank/IFC Collaboration   
 
 
31-Dec-2026 
No 
 
 
Is this a regionally tagged project? 
 
No 
 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Child 
 
 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[✓] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
[✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
 
 Disbursement Summary (from Parent ISR) 
 
Source of Funds 
Net  
Commitments 
Total Disbursed 
Remaining Balance 
Disbursed 
IBRD 
 
 
 
  
 
 % 
IDA 
  70.00 
   6.41 
  62.31    
 
9.3 % 
Grants 
  83.50 
  16.76 
  66.74 
    
 
20 % 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second 
Additional Financing - P179775) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 4 of 59 
 
SUMMARY (Total Financing) 
 
Current Financing 
Proposed Additional 
Financing 
Total Proposed 
Financing 
Total Project Cost 
153.50 
50.00 
203.50 
Total Financing 
153.50 
50.00 
203.50 
of which IBRD/IDA  
70.00 
50.00 
120.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILSNewFinEnh1- Additional Financing 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
50.00 
          IDA Grant 
50.00 
 
   
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
SML Amount 
Guarantee 
Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
0.00 
  50.00 
0.00 
   0.00 
  50.00 
Crisis Response 
Window (CRW) 
0.00 
  50.00 
0.00 
   0.00 
  50.00 
Total 
0.00 
50.00 
   0.00 
   0.00 
50.00 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
Does the project require any other Policy waiver(s)? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 5 of 59 
 
 
ESStandards 
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
ESStandardsNote 
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Urban, Resilience and Land 
 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Fragile, Conflict & Violence 
Social Sustainability and Inclusion 
Social Protection & Jobs 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 6 of 59 
 
PROJECT TEAM 
 
Bank Staff 
Name 
Role 
Specialization 
Unit 
Makiko Watanabe 
Team Leader (ADM 
Responsible) 
TTL 
SAEU3 
Francis Akolu Muthuiya 
Procurement Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Senior Procurement Specialist 
EAERU 
Stephen Diero Amayo 
Financial Management 
Specialist (ADM Responsible) 
FM 
EAEG1 
Leonard Mutuku Matheka 
Financial Management 
Specialist 
FM 
EAEG1 
Abdirahman Zeila Dubow 
Environmental Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Environmental safeguards 
SAEE2 
Sangeeta Kumari 
Social Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Social safeguards 
SAES2 
Aki Tsuda 
Social Specialist 
Social safeguards 
MNADE 
Angela Wangari Mwangi 
Team Member 
Administration 
AEMSO 
Benjamin Joseph Kushner 
Team Member 
DRM 
SAEU3 
Dahir Elmi Warsame 
Team Member 
Procurement 
EAERU 
Dhahabu Ibrahim Shair 
Team Member 
GBV 
SAES2 
Esperanza Lopez Rodriguez 
Counsel 
Legal 
LEGAM 
Haruka Miki Imoto 
Team Member 
Urban development 
GSUDL 
Latey Felix Lawson 
Team Member 
Disbursement 
WFACS 
Martin M. Serrano 
Counsel 
Legal 
LEGAM 
Nikolai Alexei Sviedrys 
Wittich 
Procurement Team 
STEP 
EAWRU 
Nuala Margaret Cowan 
Team Member 
Solid waste management 
GFDRR 
Nyabicha Omurwa Onang'o Team Member 
FM 
EAEG1 
Pamela Chebiwott Tuiyott 
Social Specialist 
GBV 
SAES2 
Peter Leonard 
Safeguards Advisor/ESSA 
Safeguards 
AFEDE 
Peter Ndungu Muiruri 
Team Member 
DRM 
SAEU3 
Puja Guha 
Team Member 
Economic Analysis 
ELCFN 
Rina Meutia 
Team Member 
DRM 
GFDRR 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 7 of 59 
 
Samaneh Hemat 
Team Member 
Social inclusion 
SAES3 
Samuel Ngethe Mbachia 
Team Member 
Civil engineering 
SAEU3 
Sarah Louise Cramer Smith 
Team Member 
M&E 
AEMSO 
Seraphine Nsabimana 
Procurement Team 
Administration 
SAEU3 
Yves Barthelemy 
Team Member 
Solid waste management 
SAWU1 
 
Extended Team 
Name 
Title 
Organization 
Location 
   
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 8 of 59 
 
I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
Introduction 
1. 
This Project Paper seeks the approval of the Board of Executive Directors for a proposed 
additional grant from IDA in the amount of SDR 39 million (US$50 million equivalent) for the Somalia 
Urban Resilience Project Phase II (SURP-II, P170922). The proposed second additional financing (AF) is 
financed by the Crisis Response Window (CRW)-Early Response Financing (ERF) for Somalia. The CRW 
funding was approved by the Board on August 26, 2022. The original grant of US$112 million (SDR 82.15 
million) was approved on December 19, 2019, and became effective on February 24, 2020. The first AF of 
US$41.5 million equivalent (US$21.5 million from the Multi-Partner Fund [MPF] and US$20 million from 
IDA) was declared effective on July 14, 2022.1 Taken together, SURP-II will have a total budget envelope 
of US$203.5 million, with a closing date of December 31, 2026.2 
2. 
The proposed SURP-II second AF entails several key changes: (a) restructure the project and add 
a new component—Component 4: Response to Urban Forced Displacement—and merge the ongoing 
financing for drought-induced internally displaced persons (IDPs) under the Contingent Emergency 
Response Component (CERC) to this component; (b) scale up Component 4 by adding US$45 million from 
the CRW-ERF in light of deteriorating drought and displacement; (c) reduce the allocation for Component 
2: Institutional Strengthening and Analytics from the existing US$5 million to US$2 million; (d) increase 
the allocation for Component 3: Project Management and Capacity Building from the current US$20.5 
million to US$28.5 million; and (e) retain the CERC now as Component 5 with a US$0 allocation. 
3. 
SURP-II’s Project Development Objectives (PDO) to strengthen public service delivery capacity of 
local governments, increase access to climate-resilient urban infrastructure and services and to provide 
immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or emergency in selected areas. 
 
4. 
SURP-II comprises four components designed to strengthen urban resilience and municipal 
governance in key cities. SURP-II supports participatory decision-making processes to identify key urban 
investments that advance urban resilience in six strategically important cities across five Federal Member 
States (FMSs) and the Benadir Regional Administration (BRA). These include the cities of Mogadishu (BRA), 
Garowe (Puntland State), Baidoa (South West State), Kismayo (Jubbaland State), Dhusamareb (Galmudug 
State), and Beledweyene (Hirshabelle State). The project helps strengthen the country’s public financial 
management (PFM) systems by channeling the funds on budget while also helping strengthen institutional 
arrangements and capacities that underpin municipal functionality and its relationships within the Somali 
Government and with external actors. The four components are as follows: 
• 
Component 1: Urban Infrastructure and Services supporting the preparation and 
implementation of all infrastructure investments. 
 
1 This included processing of US$20 million to replenish funds which were reallocated to Component 4: Contingent Emergency 
Response to respond to the worsening drought. The current US$153.5 million is financed by an IDA grant of US$70 million, as 
well as three trust fund grants under the Somalia Multi-Partner Fund (SMPF) (TF0B1409, TF0B1519, and TF0B8532) in the 
amount of US$45 million, US$17 million, and US$21.5 million. 
2 Under the first AF, the closing date was extended by 24 months to December 31, 2026, to allow for adequate completion of 
the CERC. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 9 of 59 
 
• 
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Analytics including various technical 
assistance (TA) activities such as on informal settlements; climate-resilient operation and 
maintenance (O&M) of urban infrastructure; urban governance, including solid waste 
management; and hosting of mayors’ forum. These activities help strengthen the core 
municipal functions. 
• 
Component 3: Project Management and Capacity Building providing the overall project 
management costs, including monitoring and evaluation (M&E), as well as the capacity 
building of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), Project Implementation Units (PIUs), and 
relevant municipal staff. 
• 
Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response allowing for rapid reallocation of 
uncommitted project funds in the event of a natural or man-made crisis in the future, during 
the implementation of the project, to address eligible emergency needs under the 
conditions established in its Operations Manual. 
5. 
 SURP-II implementation status. The project is more than 32 months into implementation and 
underwent its latest implementation support mission (ISM) in June 2022. It is making gradual but steady 
progress toward achieving its development objective. PDO achievement is rated Satisfactory, and 
implementation progress is rated Moderately Satisfactory (MS). The project has maintained both ratings 
above MS or better for the past 12 months, and all legal covenants including audit and financial 
management (FM) reporting requirements have been complied with. Despite the complex operating 
environment, the project is successfully being implemented across vast and diverse areas. The project has 
been performing relatively well with trained and functional municipal PIUs and a federal-level PCU at the 
Ministry of Public Works (MoPW), as well as established Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and FMS 
Interministerial Project Steering Committee. The US$20 million CERC was activated on July 19, 2022, 
focused on key urban areas and contributed to the World Bank’s overall drought response. The CERC is 
providing support on housing, land, and property (HLP)3 and basic services (water, sanitation, and hygiene 
[WASH] and/or health) in Mogadishu, Baidoa, and Garowe that are already seeing a large inflow of IDPs 
triggered by the ongoing drought. The FGS has engaged the International Organization for Migration 
(IOM)4 as an implementing partner through an output agreement signed in September 2022, while IOM 
has outsourced elements of the response to its Danwadaag Consortium5 that comprises international and 
local nongovernmental organizations (NGOs).  
6. 
As of December 5, 2022, total project disbursements stand at US$24.8 million, representing 
approximately 16 percent of the total grant of US$153.5 million. Initial delays in disbursements from the 
FGS to the FMSs, which took over six months in some cases along with delays in the completion of the 
engineering designs, led to a slow start. The disbursement has picked up pace since the SURP-II budget 
has now been transferred from the Ministry of Interior (which is in charge of all public subnational fiscal 
 
3 Includes site planning, legal support for IDPs to obtain individual land titles, and service provision within government-
designated IDP resettlement sites (Garowe and Baidoa). For IDPs living on private lands, support to obtain long-term lease 
agreements with private landowners in exchange for basic services is being provided. 
4 With its head office located in Mogadishu, IOM-Somalia operations are implemented by six field offices, eight satellite offices, 
and the Nairobi support office in Kenya. IOM field offices are present in all three targeted cities. IOM maintains a strong 
portfolio of multisector humanitarian interventions, including camp coordination and camp management (CCCM), shelter and 
non-food items, health, and WASH, with a total funding pipeline at over US$200 million. 
5 Established in 2018, the Dawnwadaag consortium comprises the Norwegian Refugee Council, Concern Worldwide, and Gredo 
and provides integrated basic services, targeted livelihood, and land tenure security and HLP.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 10 of 59 
 
transfers) to the direct client of the Federal MoPW, and construction commenced since August 2021 in 
two of the six target cities of Baidoa and Garowe. In these two cities, the first package of investments will 
be completed soon. The third city—Kismayo—has also started civil works in February 2022 after a nine-
month delay, while the PIU is working closely with the contractor to fast-track implementation. There is 
also the issue that Somalia has difficulties in attracting internationally reputable and competent 
contractors due to high risks. Future delays in implementation are possible due to deteriorating security. 
To mitigate risks of delay and enhance project performance, the project incorporates several measures: 
(a) monthly check-ins with each PIU, PCU, and the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) that 
provides engineering supervision to facilitate troubleshooting; (b) deployment of a third-party monitoring 
agent (TPMA) to review civil works progress, quality, and environmental and social (E&S) compliance, 
among other things; (c) introduction of the Geo-Enabling Initiative for Monitoring Services (GEMS) to 
streamline and visualize information management; (d) deployment of UNOPS for continuous field-level 
supervision; (e) the World Bank’s technical supervision missions in between official ISMs; and (f) PCU 
backstopping support to the PIUs. For the ongoing CERC activities, the project focuses on quick disbursing 
activities and leverages the standing capacity of implementing partners to facilitate rapid implementation.  
7. 
SURP-II helped strengthen the municipal governments’ capacity by channeling funds to the 
subnational level. The World Bank’s urban engagement in Somalia started with the Somali Urban 
Investment Planning Project (P150374) that helped municipalities plan and design priority urban 
investments. This was followed by the Somalia Urban Resilience Project (SURP) (P163857), where priority 
urban infrastructure was financed using country PFM systems at the municipal level for the first time. 
Leveraging the success of the SURP and using the IDA financing that became available, SURP-II scaled up 
the financing and geographic coverage to the entire country except for Somaliland. SURP-II’s decentralized 
approach, where funds for urban investments are transferred to the municipal level, serves as an 
important ‘learning-by-doing’ approach. The PIUs established within the municipal governments have 
been trained on core functions, such as FM, procurement, engineering, E&S risk management, citizen 
engagement, and M&E, to ensure smooth implementation of SURP-II activities. The PIUs started providing 
demand-driven support to other municipal government departments, as well as FMS-level ministries, 
helping augment their capacity. SURP-II also provided various TA activities to carry out diagnostics and 
strengthen the municipal government’s urban management, such as informal settlement upgrading, solid 
waste management, and road O&M. Finally, the project has helped better define intergovernmental 
functional roles and responsibilities related to urban services. With relatively strong implementation 
arrangements and broad geographic coverage, SURP-II has further evolved to support the Government’s 
ongoing drought response in urban areas through Government systems and leadership. This 
demonstrates that SURP-II has succeeded in establishing a platform for urban service delivery at the 
municipal level.  
Rationale for Second Additional Financing and Proposed Changes 
8. 
Somalia is on the brink of famine. Four consecutive rainy seasons failed; a climatic event not seen 
in at least 40 years. The March-June 2022 rainy season brought below average rainfall and is likely the 
driest on record, devastating livelihoods and driving sharp increases in food, water, and nutrition 
insecurity. It is estimated that over seven million people (nearly half the population) have been affected 
by severe water shortages across the country, triggering mass displacement. Since January 2021, drought-
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 11 of 59 
 
induced displacement has reached almost 1.6 million people.6 The number of affected people will likely 
increase in the coming months, given the low levels of rainfall during the current rainy season. Existing 
water sources are overstretched, and many WASH infrastructures are dysfunctional due to mechanical 
failures, overuse, and lack of proper maintenance. Consequently, an estimated 60 percent of the people 
are now using unimproved water sources, increasing the rate of water-borne diseases.7 Lessons from the 
past show that when lack of food and water is combined with disease outbreaks, mortality surges, 
especially among children. On September 8, 2022, the Global Famine Review Committee projected famine 
in two areas in the Bay region in South-Central Somalia for October to March 2023, unless humanitarian 
aid is immediately scaled up. Between January and June 2022, humanitarian assistance reached 4.1 million 
people and has prevented the worst outcomes. However, the level of assistance is outpaced by the rapidly 
growing needs. A probable fifth consecutive failed rainy season in October-December could prolong 
drought conditions into 2023. On November 23, 2021, the FGS declared the drought a national emergency 
and issued an urgent appeal for international assistance.8  
9. 
The impact of drought and floods has been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic and rising 
commodity prices due to the war in Ukraine. The pandemic is having significant indirect effects on 
security, driven by the regional economic downturn and supply chain disruptions and rising costs of 
production. Border closures have hurt trade, livestock exports, and household incomes. Daily wages have 
fallen by 27–33 percent compared to the five-year average.9 IDPs already suffer from higher poverty rates 
than non-IDPs (77 percent versus 66 percent).10 Among them, IDP families with children, especially single 
female caregivers, are expected to suffer more as they are 17–20 percentage points more likely to be poor 
than other IDPs.10 Due to repeated shocks, between 2014 and 2021, real per capita growth rates averaged 
0 percent. The ongoing severe drought is affecting Somalia’s economic recovery by reducing the country’s 
limited domestic agricultural production, including livestock—the country’s primary source of export 
earnings. More than three million estimated livestock have died of starvation and disease since mid-
2021.11 Furthermore, poor harvests and rising commodity prices, particularly for wheat and fuel, and the 
reduction of cross-border stable food imports due to the drought, are placing a strain on household 
expenditures, especially for the poor. More than 40 percent of the population is projected to be food 
insecure between October and December 2022, including at least 300,560 that will be in Catastrophe 
(Integrated Food Insecurity Phase Classification: [IPC] Phase 5).11 
10. 
The Government has limited fiscal space and policy options to respond to the drought, and 
significant funding gaps remain. The Central Bank of Somalia has no monetary policy instruments, as de 
facto dollarization supports price stability. There is limited fiscal space to allocate resources to respond to 
multiple climatic shocks, the COVID-19 pandemic, the impacts of the war in Ukraine,12 and regular security 
incidences. As Somalia is in debt distress and participating in the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) 
 
6 The displacement figures are based on the Protection and Return Monitoring Network, which is derived from key informant 
interviews. As a result, the findings should be considered as estimates. Displacement figures could be related to the 
interconnectivity between conflict and drought-induced displacement. For example, while data collectors may have identified 
drought as the primary cause of displacement, conflict may also be a factor. 
7 United Nations 2022. 
8 Office of the Prime Minister. Urgent Humanitarian Appeal (Ref: 0579). November 24, 2021. 
9 Famine Early Warning Systems Network (FEWSNET), Somalia Food Security Outlook February–September 2021. 
10 World Bank 2022. https://blogs.worldbank.org/africacan/want-keep-internally-displaced-people-somalia-out-poverty-
increase-womens-economic.  
11 FEWSNET, Somalia Food Security Outlook October–December 2022. 
12 In recent years, Somalia sourced 90 percent of its wheat from the Russia Federation and Ukraine. Somalia is highly dependent 
on food imports, which cover 60–65 percent of domestic requirements even in the best of years. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 12 of 59 
 
initiative, there are no opportunities to borrow to increase fiscal space to respond to crises. In response 
to the drought crisis, the FGS submitted a request for financing under the CRW-ERF to the World Bank on 
July 5, 2022, to scale up the ongoing response.13 To date, US$1.05 billion has been raised (46 percent of 
the US$2.26 billion required) by humanitarian partners for the wider humanitarian response.14. Critical 
gaps remain across key sectors to prevent famine and provide lifesaving assistance and sustain lives and 
livelihoods. The funding gaps for the key sectors are as follows: food security (37 percent), WASH (73 
percent), nutrition (45 percent), and health (58 percent), among other sectors. All remaining available IDA 
resources for FY23 have been notionally programmed, leaving no additional resources for drought 
response or recovery, and making the CRW-ERF resources a critical last resort for much-needed additional 
support. 
11. 
Somalia is a context beset by frequent climate-related shocks and protracted conflict, which has 
triggered large-scale displacement, contributing to rapid urbanization. Somalia’s rapid urbanization is 
driven by traditional economic rural-urban migration, as well as decades of internal conflicts and cyclical 
environmental adversities such as drought and famine. The growth rate for urban population is high at 
around 4.3 percent per year.15 An estimated 54 percent of Somalis are currently living in cities—compared 
to neighboring Kenya’s 28 percent—and the urban population is expected to triple by 2050.16 It is 
estimated that approximately 75 percent of the country’s IDPs live in Somali cities, fleeing violence and in 
search of better jobs and services. Consequently, about one-quarter of today’s urban population are 
thought to be IDPs.17 Somalia is highly susceptible to the effects of climate change and extreme weather 
events, which could exacerbate the rural-urban migration or affect the welfare of the urban residents. 
Depending on the Representative Concentration Pathways scenario, temperature in Somalia may rise 
between 1.4 and 1.9°C by 2030.18 The annual number of very hot days (with daily maximum temperature 
above 35°C) is projected to increase with high certainty all over Somalia, with central Somalia being 
particularly affected. Higher exposure to heatwaves will very likely lead to an increase in heat-related 
mortality. Heatwaves will also affect the Somali economy, and projected sea level rise threatens the 
livelihoods of coastal communities, including those in the capital Mogadishu.19 
12. 
As urban areas fail to keep pace with the rapid urbanization, Somalia’s cities are becoming more 
fragile, threatening the country’s stability. As Somali cities grow rapidly, the absence of adequate 
planning and uneven, contested governance risk stunting the potential development and economic 
growth Somali cities can generate. Unplanned growth is resulting in slum expansion and environmental 
degradation. Basic public goods, such as roads, water and sewer systems, and access to the power grid 
are complicated by unplanned growth. Settlement patterns are typically highly segregated by ethnic 
groups/clans. Meanwhile, cities are receiving large waves of forcibly displaced people and other rural-
urban migrants, which risks shifting clan dynamics in ways that are destabilizing. The rights of urban IDPs 
are contested, and their settlements are often cut off from basic services. Poor and marginalized groups, 
 
13 SURP-II recently activated the US$20 million CERC to provide urgent support for the newly arriving drought-induced IDPs and 
the host communities in Mogadishu, Baidoa, and Garowe, in collaboration with the IOM and its Dawnwadaag consortium. 
14 The updated 2022 Humanitarian Response Plan requires US$2.26 billion to respond to the most life-threatening needs of 
7.76 million people.  
15 UN World Population Prospects 2019 and World Urbanization Prospects 2018 (United Nations Department of Economic and 
Social Affairs).  
16 World Bank. 2021. Somalia Urbanization Review: Fostering Cities as Anchors of Development. 
17 World Bank 2021.  
18 World Bank. Forthcoming. Somalia Country Climate Risk Profile. 
19 World Bank, forthcoming. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 13 of 59 
 
more broadly, are often excluded from access to land and basic services. Further, property disputes in 
neighborhoods where real estate is a prized and scarce commodity are a major source of violence and 
communal tension. As promising as Somalia’s cities’ economic successes have been, the risks of targeted 
political violence, communal clashes, and terrorist attacks make them vulnerable.20 
13. 
The increased inflow of IDPs due to the drought puts additional strain on the already 
overstretched cities. IDPs in Somalia total approximately 2.96 million21 people, and the majority are 
settled in precariously conditioned sites in urban and peri-urban areas. Clusters of IDP camps, de facto 
slums, spread throughout cities.22 More than 1.1 million individuals have been displaced to IDP sites in 
urban centers in 2022 alone, with Baidoa receiving the highest number of new arrivals (almost 32 percent 
or over 360,000 IDPs), followed by Mogadishu (over 27 percent or over 306,000 IDPs).23 Taken together, 
the two cities host 59 percent of all the drought-induced IDPs that have been displaced to date. Garowe 
has received 3,461 IDPs to date.24 While Garowe has not received significant numbers of new drought 
displacement IDPs, the situation of the existing caseload of IDPs remains critical as most are classified in 
Emergency (IPC Phase 4). An additional 520,000 individuals are estimated to be displaced by the end of 
the year.25 The growing population in these cities places considerable stress on municipal service delivery 
capacity, increasing social tensions between host communities and the displaced.  
14. 
SURP-II’s support for the drought-induced IDPs flowing into urban centers complements the 
World Bank’s overall drought response in Somalia. To date, the World Bank has allocated US$393.5 
million for drought response through various ongoing operations: the Shock Responsive Safety Net for 
Human Capital Project (P171346, known as the Baxnaano Program), Shock Responsive Safety Net for 
Locust Response Project (P174065), Water for Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Resilience Project (P167826, 
known as the Biyoole Project), and the SCRP (P173315). Other relevant new operations include the 
recently approved World Bank Group (WBG)-supported Horn of Africa - Groundwater for Resilience 
Project (P174867); the De-risking, Inclusion, and Value Enhancement of Pastoral Economies in the Horn 
of Africa Project (P176517); and the planned Food Systems Resilience Project (P179832) under 
preparation, which will advance medium to longer-term solutions to boost food and nutrition security, 
reduce risks, and strengthen food systems. While these projects collectively help alleviate the impacts of 
drought in rural areas, none of them operate in urban areas where the majority of the drought-induced 
IDPs are coming. SURP-II is the only project that has established implementation arrangements at the 
municipal level and has experience providing drought response through the CERC. It is thus imperative 
that SURP-II leverages the preexisting structure and experience to scale up the drought response for urban 
IDPs. The World Bank-supported drought response collectively puts the Government in the driver’s seat 
to oversee and coordinate the emergency response. Based on the needs assessment conducted by 
humanitarian agencies, newly arriving IDPs require emergency cash transfer (ECT) to address their acute 
food insecurity in addition to access to basic services such as nutrition, health, and WASH. Since the 
Baxnaano Program is yet to operate in urban areas, it was agreed that SURP-II will provide the cash 
transfer but harmonize the targeting, levels of contribution, duration, and data collection with the 
Baxnaano Program.  
 
20 World Bank 2021.  
21 UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees). Data Portal (as of February 2022). 
22 CCCM Cluster Somalia Overview (UNHCR). 
23 Microsoft Power BI New Arrivals Tracker CCCM (Reporting dates: January 6–November 10, 2022). 
24 CCCM cluster site verification. 
25 Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM) Drought Analysis 2021. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 14 of 59 
 
15. 
Considering the urgency to act, this second AF is being processed as an emergency operation. 
This is pursuant to paragraph 12, Projects in Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity 
Constraints of Section III of the World Bank Policy, Investment Project Financing. There will be no deferral 
of the E&S requirements.  
II. DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
A. Summary of the Proposed Changes  
16. 
The proposed changes under the SURP-II second AF are detailed in Table 1 and section C.  
Table 1. Summary of Proposed Changes 
Activities 
Proposed Changes 
(a) Component 2: Institutional Strengthening 
and Analytics 
• Reduce the budget allocation from the current US$5 million 
to US$2 million. 
(b) Component 3: Project Management and 
Capacity building  
• Add US$8 million. 
• The total allocation will increase from the existing US$20.5 
million to US$28.5 million. 
(c) Component 4: Response to Urban Forced 
Displacement 
• To add a new component that combines all the project’s 
drought response activities including those under the CERC. 
• To scale up and expand the project’s drought response 
through an additional US$45 million from the CRW-ERF and 
reallocation of US$20 million from the CERC, totaling an 
allocation of US$65 million for the component.  
(d) Component 5: CERC 
• The CERC will now be labeled as a new Component 5 
(previously Component 4). 
• The CERC will now have a US$0 budget allocation.  
(e) Changes to the Results Framework 
• Intermediate indicators edited and new indicators to be 
added to reflect the scaled-up drought response. 
• Targets changed for the PDO and intermediate indicators to 
reflect the scaled-up drought response 
B. Project Development Objective 
17. 
The PDO will not be changed for this second AF. The PDO remains to strengthen public service 
delivery capacity of local governments, increase access to climate-resilient urban infrastructure and 
services and to provide immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or emergency in selected 
areas. 
C. Project Components and Costs 
18. 
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Analytics (US$2 million equivalent, of which IDA 
US$2 million). Budget allocation for Component 2 will be reduced from the existing US$5 million to US$2 
million to address the shortfall of the project management budget to account for the two-year extension 
of the project closing date, which was approved under the previous AF. The remaining budget will finance 
the preparation of city-strategic development plans where needed and the Somalia mayor’s forum to 
encourage peer-to-peer learning among different mayors on critical issues related to urban development. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 15 of 59 
 
This component contributes to GCRF Pillar 4: Strengthening Policies, Institutions, and Investments for 
Rebuilding Better.  
19. 
Component 3: Project Management and Capacity Building (US$28.5 million equivalent, of which 
IDA US$18 million and Somalia Multi-Partner Fund (SMPF) US$10.5 million). To cover the Government’s 
increased project management costs due to drought response and the extended project closing date, the 
budget allocation will be increased from the current US$20.5 million to US$28.5 million. This component 
also contributes to GCRF Pillar 4.  
20. 
Component 4: Response to Urban Forced Displacement (US$65 million equivalent from IDA). A 
new component will be added to provide urgent support for the newly arriving IDPs affected by climate-
related drought to alleviate the increased pressure on the already limited urban services and mitigate 
social tension. The ongoing drought response activities under the CERC worth US$20 million will be 
incorporated into this new Component 4. In Baidoa and Mogadishu, the proposed AF will provide target 
households a ‘minimum response package’ (MRP) that includes ECT,26 two plastic sheets for emergency 
shelter, and one hygiene kit per household. At the site level, IDPs will benefit from emergency water 
supply (water trucking, solar-powered boreholes’ rehabilitation/construction), sanitation services 
(construction of communal latrines/handwashing stations), Camp Coordination Camp Management 
(CCCM) (biometric registration of beneficiaries, displacement tracking, and service delivery monitoring 
through community-based camp management committees27), and health and nutrition assistance 
(deployment of mobile health teams, strengthening of existing community health centers, and training of 
community health workers and staff). The injection of cash to families at the outset of the emergency will 
enable the project to rapidly scale up while supporting families to meet their most immediate needs. In 
Garowe, the proposed second AF will provide health and nutrition services (mobile health clinics) that 
cater to the drought-induced IDPs, which could not be provided under the CERC due to budget constraints. 
These sectors and target areas were identified as top priorities in the Drought Response and Famine 
Prevention Plan (DRFPP),28 based on the most recent UN agencies, NGO, and FGS assessments. In 
alignment with the parent project, all infrastructure supported under the AF will meet climate-resilient29 
standards. The proposed activities are expected to be completed within 12 months. According to the 
recently completed assessment by the Foreign, Commonwealth, and Development Office (FCDO), MRP 
was evaluated positively for having accomplished an integrated approach of support for those recently 
displaced in urban environments and was recommended for further expansion. This component 
contributes to GCRF Pillar 1: Responding to Food Insecurity and Pillar 3: Strengthening Resilience.  
 
26 The project will provide US$60 per drought-affected household for six months, a total of US$360 per household (in line with 
the Baxnaano ECT and the recommended transfer value for multipurpose cash assistance according to the Somalia Cash 
Working Group [CWG]). The project will also register relevant beneficiary households’ socioeconomic information in the FGS 
unified social registry being developed by the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MoLSA) and supported by the WFP under the 
Baxaano program. 
27 Camp management committees work with partners in designated zones (‘zonal champions’) to support IDP 
registration/verification through a criteria-based approach. The committees comprise representative IDP groups.  
28 https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/somalia-drought-response-and-famine-prevention-plan-may-december-2022-june-
2022.  
29 Infrastructure is planned, designed, and operated in a way that anticipates, prepares for, and adapts to changing climate 
conditions (including for flooding and drought).  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 16 of 59 
 
Table 2. City-Wise Activities 
Mogadishu 
Baidoa 
Garowe 
Targeting: Kahda, Daynile (25,000 
households, 150,000 people)  
 
 
[Household Level] 
• Emergency cash transfer 
(US$60/household * 6 mos)  
• Plastic sheets for emergency 
shelter  
• 1 hygiene kit/household 
 
[Community Level] 
 • Emergency water supply (water 
trucking, boreholes)  
• Sanitation services (construction 
of communal latrines) 
 • Health and nutrition assistance 
through strengthening of existing 
community health centers/mobile 
health clinics and their services  
• CCCM 
Targeting: All IDP hosting areas 
(25,000 households, 150,000 
people)  
 
[Household Level] 
• Emergency cash transfer 
(US$60/household * 6 mos)  
• Plastic sheets for emergency 
shelter  
• 1 hygiene kit/household 
 
[Community Level] 
• Emergency water supply (water 
trucking, boreholes)  
• Sanitation services (construction 
of communal latrines)  
• Health and nutrition assistance 
through strengthening of existing 
community health centers/mobile 
health clinics and their services  
• CCCM 
Targeting: New relocation site 
(5,000 households, 30,000 people)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Community Level] 
• Additional primary health care 
and nutrition support through 
provision of mobile health clinic 
21. 
The proposed activities will not only address the immediate needs but will also contribute to 
longer-term development outcomes by leveraging SURP-II’s ongoing development interventions. Cash 
transfers alleviate immediate food insecurity, while health, nutrition, and WASH interventions address 
preventable morbidity and  mortality. By channeling the support through the Government, the proposed 
AF helps strengthen the Government’s capacity to plan, coordinate, and oversee humanitarian assistance. 
Further, the project will seek synergies between the ongoing development activities by supporting the 
cities to follow the city spatial development plan in planning IDP sites; connecting project roads, drainage, 
and solar streetlights to IDP sites; and drawing on community structures established under SURP-II, such 
as project grievance redress and O&M committees, to verify and monitor beneficiaries of the 
humanitarian support and provide sustainable O&M of the facilities (such as boreholes) to be built.  
22. 
The proposed activities are complementary to the CERC activities in that they both target the 
drought-induced IDPs in the same cities. However, the proposed activities under this second AF differ 
from the CERC activities under the parent project in a couple of ways. First, the proposed activities are 
more short term in nature—there is no support for HLP, such as transitional shelter and security of tenure. 
Second, the geographic targeting may be slightly different and based on arrival trends in ‘zones’. In BRA 
and Baidoa, areas of new IDP arrivals have been divided into zones (‘MRP zones’), based on administrative 
boundaries, natural landmarks, and locations of the new arrivals. In Mogadishu, the CERC activities 
targeted zones 4 and 5 in Khada and Daynille districts, the two districts with the highest concentration of 
new arrivals, but the proposed AF activities may target up to all 10 zones in the same districts. In Baidoa, 
the CERC activities targeted the Barwaqo North Extension and the Agricultural Development Center (ADC) 
area (zone 7). Under the AF, the activities will target up to eight zones, excluding the Barwaqo North 
Extension (as IDPs resettled to the Barwaqo site will have access to basic services provided under the 
CERC), but include the southern side of ADC, where new IDPs continue to flow in, and two other areas 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 17 of 59 
 
called Holwadaag and Berdale to the West and East of the city that also host drought-induced IDPs. These 
areas are depicted as zones 1 to 8 in figure 2. The actual zones to be targeted in Mogadishu and Baidoa 
will be determined at the time of activity implementation considering the latest IDP movements and the 
availability of other resources. In Garowe, the CERC activities targeted an IDP resettlement site of 
Holdaal30 and will remain the same under the AF. In addition to the US$20 million reallocated from the 
CERC, US$45 million from the CRW-ERF will be added to this component. In total, the new component will 
receive an allocation of US$65 million. The output agreement signed between the FGS and IOM for the 
CERC will be amended to accommodate the additional activities. In addition to its Danwadaag Consortium, 
IOM may engage additional partners to facilitate rapid scale up of project activities. 
Figure 1. IDP Settlements in Mogadishu 
 
Source: IOM October 2022. 
Figure 2. IDP Settlements in Baidoa 
 
 
 
30 Initially, the resettlement site was in the northeast of the city center called Armale, but the Government shifted the 
resettlement site to an area to Holdaal, where IDP sites are already established. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 18 of 59 
 
Source: IOM October 2022. 
 
Figure 3. IDP Settlements in Garowe 
 
Source: IOM October 2022. 
23. 
City selection was determined through a criteria-based approach, which include (a) drought 
displacement projected arrivals; (b) IDPs’ Integrated Phase Classification rating from FEWSNET, which 
measures the level of food insecurity; (c) eviction risk—as measured by IDP sites’ security of tenure and 
recent issuance of eviction notices; (d) the city’s absorption capacity—as measured by the level of political 
willingness to accommodate IDPs and availability of existing settlement sites for IDPs; and (e) overall 
balance within the World Bank’s portfolio-wide drought response to different areas in Somalia and the 
ongoing CERC. Given the dynamic and evolving drought situation, the actual budget allocation by city and 
target area/zone will be determined at the time of project implementation using the allocation formula 
(detailed in the following paragraph) and the up-to-date information at the time of actual funding to 
determine the final allocations.31 The allocation formula has been endorsed by the Government. 
Budget Allocation Formula 
24. 
Given the relatively smaller number of drought-induced IDPs arriving in Garowe, the allocation to 
Garowe will be limited to approximately US$2.7 million to provide supplementary primary health and 
nutrition support to the ongoing CERC activities. This will maximize the impact of the existing CERC 
investments and meet essential needs for drought-affected IDPs and the surrounding host community in 
Garowe. The additional health and nutrition investments in Garowe present an opportunity to layer a 
 
31 Based on the Somalia Humanitarian Needs Overview, the funding requirement by relevant cluster includes (a) food security 
(US$610 million to reach 5.68 million people), (b) health (US$73.5 million to reach 4.9 million people), (c) WASH (US$74 million 
to reach 3.89 million people), and (d) nutrition (US$60 million to reach 733,000 people). However, the humanitarian plans do 
not provide activity-level costing. While borrowing from the cluster costing methodology, the city-wise and activity costing will 
be determined in consultation with the Government and implementing partners using a criteria-based calculation 
methodology, similar to the city selection criteria, which will also consider evolving donor commitments in each target city and 
absorption capacity.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 19 of 59 
 
targeted needs-based intervention on existing operational structures, providing value for money and 
complementing existing programming. FEWSNET estimates that 7,740 people will be in IPC level 5 
between October and December 2022—largely the Garowe IDP population, which will be the primary 
target of this emergency response allocation.  
25. 
The remaining financing of US$42.3 million will be allocated to Baidoa and Mogadishu based on 
the criteria below. According to the agreement with the Government and given the dynamic situation on 
the ground, the actual allocation will be determined at the time of activity implementation.  
• 
Equal allocation (50 percent)  
• 
Drought needs-based allocation (50 percent). 
26. 
The drought needs allocation is calculated from 
• 
Projected arrivals of drought-induced IDPs based on the CCCM Cluster New Arrival Tracker 
(30 percent weight); 
• 
Levels of food insecurity based on IPC projections from FEWSNET (30 percent weight); and 
• 
District prioritization in the UN Famine Prevention Strategy (40 percent weight). 
27. 
Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0). With the proposed second AF, US$20 
million will be reallocated to a new dedicated drought response component. The allocation for the CERC 
will decrease from US$20 million equivalent from IDA to US$0. 
Table 3. Project Cost by Component and Funding Sources (US$, millions) 
Component 
Parent Project 
First AF 
Second AF 
Total 
1. Urban Infrastructure and Services 
89.0 
108.0 
108.0 
108.0 
2. Institutional Strengthening and Analytics 
5.0 
5.0 
2.0 
2.0 
3. Project Management and Capacity Building 
18.0 
20.5 
28.5 
28.5 
4. Response to Urban Forced Displacement 
— 
— 
65.0a  
65.0 
5. CERC 
0.0 
20.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Total 
112.0 
153.5 
203.5 
203.5 
Note: a. US$20 million is shifted from the original CERC to Component 4. 
D. PDO, Intermediate Results Indicators, and Beneficiaries 
28. 
The immediate beneficiaries of the proposed second AF are the residents of BRA, Garowe, and 
Baidoa. Under the drought response, approximately 300,000 drought-induced IDPs, many of whom are 
women and children, will benefit. This is equivalent to about 30 percent of all the drought-induced IDPs. 
With the ongoing drought support being provided under SURP-II, the total beneficiaries will add up to 
approximately 401,000 IDPs.32 Finally, the BRA, Baidoa, and Garowe municipality staff will benefit from 
capacity-building initiatives under the second AF. A slightly revised PDO indicator and selected 
 
32 Under the ongoing drought response under the CERC, some host community members are also expected to benefit, though 
the proposed AF activities will only benefit the drought-induced IDPs. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 20 of 59 
 
intermediate indicators will be added to account for the proposed drought response component activities. 
The revised PDO indicator is shown in Table 4. 
Table 4. Revised PDO Indicator for the Proposed Drought Response 
Original Indicator 
Revised/Proposed 
End Target Revised/Proposed 
Remarks 
Existing PDO Indicator 
Number of beneficiaries 
reached under the CERC 
activities (% female, % 
IDPs, % host 
communities) 
Number of 
beneficiaries reached 
under the municipal 
drought response 
(number, % women, % 
IDPs)  
71,000 
371,000 
• Includes an additional 
300,000 beneficiaries from 
the proposed AF. 
• This will be measured in 
the three target cities of 
Mogadishu, Baidoa, and 
Garowe. 
• Under the CERC activities, 
a minimum of 80% of 
drought-induced IDPs will 
be targeted.  
E. Theory of Change  
29. 
Figure 4 represents the proposed revisions to SURP-II’s Theory of Change (ToC) as a result of the 
expanded drought response activities under the second AF. The ToC underlying the drought response 
interventions is that supporting municipal government capacity and delivering an effective response to 
the drought crisis would support the Government’s efforts to demonstrate visible and tangible 
improvements in the lives of its citizens in the short and longer term. As a result, urban resilience and local 
governance will be strengthened while state legitimacy will also be reinforced. In the context of Somalia, 
however, the ToC outlined in figure 4 would be nonlinear and iterative in nature. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 21 of 59 
 
Figure 4. ToC 
 
F. Cross Cutting Priorities  
(a) Community Engagement and Inclusion of Vulnerable Groups 
30. 
The drought response will be conflict sensitive by supporting newly displaced persons, 
protracted IDPS, and host communities. The displacement figures are based on the Protection and Return 
Monitoring Network, which is derived from key informant interviews. As a result, the findings should be 
considered as estimates and can relate to the interconnectivity between conflict and drought-induced 
displacement. While data collectors may have identified drought as the primary cause of displacement, 
conflict was certainly a factor as well, particularly as the new government has recently intensified the fight 
against Al-Shabab. The project primarily targets newly displaced persons given their heightened 
vulnerability but also addresses other population groups in target sites to avoid frictions and spread 
benefits. By leveraging the existing local structures, such as camp management committees, and oversight 
from the municipal PIUs, the proposed AF also aims to quickly identify and mitigate any issues. Moreover, 
IOM and its partners offer a range of tools and expertise related to beneficiary communication and conflict 
analysis and resolution, which is a central aspect of the project’s approach. The proposed AF would 
complement wider response efforts by humanitarian partners. 
31. 
Meaningful and robust engagement with communities around project activities is a key focus 
of the drought response, particularly in ensuring their inclusion in decision-making processes around 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 22 of 59 
 
prioritization of investments and addressing any project-related grievances in economic opportunities 
generated by the project and sustainability of project interventions, such as through project O&M 
committees. Under the drought response, systems will be put in place to ensure the inclusion of IDPs and 
host communities in the decision-making process. 
32. 
In particular, community engagement processes in the project will ensure inclusion of women 
and IDPs, considering their limited participation in decision-making processes in the Somali context. Data 
indicate that women in Somalia are vastly underrepresented in decision-making positions in government, 
although there is some evidence of recent improvement. However, there are no reliable data on the 
extent of participation of women in decision-making at the local government level or at the household 
level. Similarly, there are no quantitative data available on the extent of participation of IDPs in decision-
making bodies. 
33. 
The proposed AF will adopt a robust and quality community engagement approach toward 
participatory planning and decision-making by supporting the participation of women and IDPs in key 
decision-making and tracking with an indicator their perception on whether their voices were reflected in 
the decisions. The project in this way also meets the two design-stage community engagement corporate 
requirements by having a strong community engagement approach and a beneficiary feedback indicator 
‘Beneficiaries satisfied that infrastructure met their needs (number, disagregated by percentage of female 
and IDPs)’. 
(b) Gender 
34. 
Somalia ranks the fourth lowest globally on gender issues, with a Gender Inequality Index of 
0.776.33 The maternal mortality rate is extremely high, estimated at 732 per 100,000 live births, with 1 in 
12 women dying due to pregnancy-related causes. Early marriage is prevalent, and an estimated 91 
percent of women ages 15–19 have undergone female genital mutilation. Gender-based violence (GBV) 
is pervasive, dominated by physical assault and intimate partner violence, which has increased since the 
COVID-19 pandemic.34 Ongoing conflict and recurring natural disasters have only exacerbated existing 
vulnerabilities and social marginalization of women. Notably, prolonged exposure to droughts in Somalia 
have extended traditional coping strategies, such as migration and family separation, contributing to 
school dropouts of boys and girls and necessitating women to bear disproportionate responsibilities. 
Female-headed households have increased as a result of the extended absence of males due to drought 
and abnormal migration. Women in Somalia are vastly underrepresented in decision-making positions in 
government, although there is some evidence of recent improvement. However, there are no reliable 
data on the extent of participation of women in decision-making in specific committees, including for the 
ongoing drought response where there are currently no explicit requirements for female representation 
within the camp management committees, the local government level or at the household level. Similarly, 
there are no quantitative data available on the extent of participation of IDPs in decision-making bodies.  
35. 
The parent project is ‘gender tagged’ and the proposed project will ensure protection 
mainstreaming throughout the project cycle across all activities, ensuring that gender-specific needs are 
addressed and GBV risks mitigated and that the principles of do no harm, safety, and nondiscrimination 
 
33 https://www.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/Headquarters/Attachments/Sections/Library/Publications/2020/Funding-for-
GEEWG-in-humanitarian-programming-Somalia-en.pdf. June 2020.  
34 https://somalia.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/SOMALIA%20NEWSLETTER%20-%20June%20%20%283%29.pdf. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 23 of 59 
 
guide any activity and are adhered to.35 To address the risks of GBV, the proposed AF-supported activities 
will aim to mainstream protection principles—to promote peaceful access, safety, and dignity in 
humanitarian aid—throughout the design, implementation, and monitoring stages. Anticipated activities 
include (a) conducting safety orientations that help new arrivals understand where they can safely access 
services; (b) monitoring zones at a high risk for violence; (c) ensuring adequate lighting in public and 
communal areas; (d) installing gender-sensitive infrastructure; (e) establishing referral pathways to 
support victims of violence; (f) integrating gender-balanced project committees and training on GBV 
prevention to support service monitoring; (g) targeting females for assistance, such as female-headed 
households; and (h) applying IOM’s Institutional Framework for Addressing GBV in Crises to ensure that 
gender-specific needs are addressed and measures taken to mitigate risks of GBV.  
36. 
To address the social gap where women have little agency, deliberate efforts will be made to 
ensure that women, along with other vulnerable groups, such as IDPs and youth, have meaningful 
participation in the planning/decision-making process of the priority investments. As referenced earlier, 
women will also be represented in the community-based O&M, grievance redress mechanism (GRM), and 
camp management committees and will be provided additional GBV prevention training. Women’s 
meaningful participation in the project will be monitored through the intermediate indicator: ‘Percentage 
of women engaged in the selected cities who consider that their needs and priorities have been taken 
into account in final planning decision and design of the drought response’. The second AF supports 
enhancing women’s voice and agency, in line with the World Bank Gender Strategy (2016–23), through 
its focus on increasing participation of women in decision-making.  
37. 
Given that IDPs tend to be predominantly female-headed households, majority of the project’s 
beneficiaries of the cash transfer will be women. Due to socio-cultural considerations and to mitigate 
risks of increased GBV, the project will not limit recipients of cash transfer to women. However, over 80 
percent of the IDPs tend to be female-headed households, and therefore the project expects that at least 
70 percent of the cash transfer beneficiaries will be women. The project will ensure meaningful access of 
women to cash transfers and freedom of control and utilization in safety and dignity, which will be 
identified through regular safety audit, post distribution monitoring, and beneficiaries impact assessment.  
(c) Climate Co-Benefits 
38. 
The second AF is situated in a country characterized by substantial climate and disaster risks. 
Climate change will continue to be a major contributing factor to displacement in urban areas and 
increased demand on urban service in Somalia in the future, as drylands continue to see warmer 
temperatures and lower rainfall.36 Climate-related disasters in Somalia are becoming more frequent and 
prolonged, and the impacts of COVID-19, locust outbreaks, and drought have only compounded these 
threats. Extreme climatic events will affect marginalized and vulnerable groups in urban areas more 
severely due to their low adaptive and coping capacities. 
39. 
The proposed second AF will have substantial climate change adaptation and mitigation co-
benefits. The second AF will leverage Somalia’s potential for solar power: the country annually receives 
an average of 2,900 to 3,100 hours of sunshine and has one of the highest daily total solar radiation 
 
35 To be guided by IOM’s Institutional Framework for Addressing GBV in Crises (GBViC Framework) and the project’s 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).  
36 World Bank. 2018. Groundswell: Preparing for Internal Climate Migration. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 24 of 59 
 
averages on the earth, with annual solar radiation estimation of over 2,450 kWh per m2 per year. The AF 
will, therefore, also include solar-powered boreholes, which will not only offer a long-term low-cost 
solution to water scarcity by providing water to thousands of people but will also have significant climate 
mitigation co-benefits. The project will also reforest, where feasible, near boreholes to support watershed 
function. All infrastructure financed by the AF will be planned, designed, and operated in a way that 
anticipates, prepares for, and adapts to changing climate conditions (including for flooding and drought). 
For example, latrines will be constructed on elevated platforms to ensure flood proofing. The project will 
also link to proposed real-time monitoring and modeling of water resources while considering climate, 
population, and displacement trends, as coordinated by the WASH cluster. These efforts will inform the 
sustainability of project investments, water trucking, boreholes, O&M, and longer-term infrastructure 
investments and engagement to support a municipal regulatory framework on water use and 
infrastructure. Finally, activities under the second AF will respond directly to the ongoing climate-induced 
drought emergency, improving access to essential services while building coping capacities. By supporting 
and working through local coordination structures, the project will also reinforce the Government’s 
capacity to manage future crisis.  
G. Implementation Arrangements 
40. 
The second AF builds on SURP-II’s existing institutional structures to oversee and coordinate 
the project’s drought response.37 The parent project is implemented through the FGS, and a Financing 
Agreement was signed between the Federal Ministry of Finance and World Bank. Subsidiary Agreements 
signed between the Federal Ministry of Finance and the FMSs outline the budget allocation for each FMS 
and cities along with their respective roles and responsibilities. Given the project’s focus on municipal 
capacity strengthening, the overall responsibility for project implementation lies with the municipalities. 
The PIUs established within the municipal governments facilitate implementation. Specifically, the PIUs 
coordinate overall project implementation, ensure timely payments to contractors, assume overall 
responsibility for the relevant E&S due diligence, ensure continuous community outreach and 
consultation, maintain project accounts and produce financial reports, undertake M&E activities, ensure 
functional and accessible GRM, and report results to various stakeholders. The PCU is responsible for 
providing coordination and technical support to the municipalities as needed. The FGS Interministerial 
Project Steering Committee is responsible for providing strategic guidance to the project, approving the 
inclusion of additional cities into the project, and deciding on the funding allocations across cities. Under 
the second AF, for the scaled-up activities under Component 4, the same implementation arrangements 
will be followed as shown in Figure 5. 
 
37 See SURP-II Project Appraisal Document (PAD), annex 1, for additional details, including the PIU and PCU staffing. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 25 of 59 
 
Figure 5. SURP-II Second AF - Implementation Arrangements 
 
Note: Office of the Prime Minister (OPM); Ministry of Planning, Investment, and Economic Development (MoPIED); Ministry of Finance (MoF) 
41. 
Drought response activities are implemented under a different modality to ensure timely 
implementation though still under the overarching umbrella of the SURP-II institutional arrangements. 
The SURP-II PCU, embedded in the MoPW, has the overall responsibility for the monitoring and 
supervision of all drought response activities, including E&S risk management. For efficient operational 
scale-up, the additional CRW resources will be absorbed through the ongoing SURP-II, and the Output 
Agreement signed between the FGS and IOM for the CERC will be amended to incorporate the additional 
activities.38 The fiduciary responsibility lies exclusively with IOM. As under the CERC, IOM will outsource 
elements of the response through members of its Danwadaag Consortium. In addition, IOM plans to 
contract the consortium Building Resilient Communities in Somalia (BRCIS) to support health and nutrition 
activities39 and the World Food Programme (WFP) to advise on beneficiary targeting, registration, and 
monitoring of its cash programming while ensuring alignment with the Baxnaano Program. IOM has been 
at the forefront of drought response as well as IDP support in Somalia and has proven its performance 
through the FCDO-funded MRP and the Danwadaag Consortium, European Union (EU)-funded IDP 
support (EU Reintegration Program), and the UN’s joint program called the Samaayenta Program, all of 
which focus on sustainable solutions for urban IDPs.  
42. 
The established PIUs in Mogadishu, Baidoa, and Garowe will support the day-to-day supervision 
and monitoring of the drought response activities, including E&S compliance. Given the need to 
coordinate with relevant stakeholders engaged in drought response and durable solutions activities, the 
PCU and the PIUs will also coordinate with the Somalia Disaster Management Agency (SODMA) (recently 
re-constituted) and the Durable Solutions Units within the FMS. The FMS SURP-II and FGS Interministerial 
Project Steering Committee can be leveraged for coordination between ministries to ensure adequate 
 
38 IOM-Somalia has absorbed a 25 percent increase in its annual budget for 2022, which currently stands at US$96 million 
(including confirmed funding). Its total pipeline now stands at over US$200 million for the remainder of 2022 and 2023, and the 
mission has demonstrated its capacity to rapidly scale up its response and deliver effectively. 
39 Save the Children (Save) and Action Against Hunger (ACF) would be contracted under Norwegian Refugee Council 
(NRC)/BRCIS. While they are part of the consortium, they still require contracting for additional program activities. IOM-Somalia 
would only contract NRC/BRCIS, who would then in turn contract Save and ACF. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 26 of 59 
 
knowledge sharing for a multisectoral response at the interface between humanitarian and durable 
solution interventions. 
Figure 6. SURP-II Drought Response Implementation Arrangements 
 
H. Lessons Learned from the Parent Project  
43. 
Facilitating transparency and accountability through formula-based allocation is essential. In 
the absence of IDA funds, the SURP (P149036) and the Somalia Urban Investment Planning Project (SUIPP, 
P150374) scaled up ‘opportunistically’ based on the availability of donor funding and according to their 
geographical preferencing. Given the political tensions among different FMSs, however, the only way to 
rationalize city allocation is based on the objective, evidence-based allocation formula which was adopted 
under SURP-II, shifting away from allocation determined by power politics. SURP-II is the first World Bank-
financed project in Somalia to use an evidence-based formula to determine funding allocations across 
cities, setting a precedence for other World Bank-supported projects to follow. The allocation formula has 
been adapted to adhere to the same principle but cater to a different set of activities meant for drought 
response as opposed to urban development under the proposed AF. The new allocation formula 
incorporates equal allocation and drought needs allocation. The latter is calculated based on (a) projected 
arrivals of the drought-induced IDPs, (b) levels of food insecurity as measured by IPC projections from 
FEWSNET, (c) and prioritization in the UN Famine Prevention Strategy. Such a formula ensures that the 
largest support goes to cities that are receiving the highest number of IDPs with the highest levels of food 
insecurity. Given the dynamic situation on the ground, the actual allocation will be determined at the time 
of activity implementation using the latest data.  
44. 
Emphasizing a simple project design with a decentralized implementation arrangement has 
contributed to the project’s success. SURP-II entails simple components and interrelated activities with a 
decentralized implementation arrangement at the municipal level that are well suited to the challenging 
and fragmented Somali context. It also allows the provision of activities that are best suited for the local 
context. The decentralized approach, where municipal governments play the central role in project 
implementation, has minimized political interference in the face of ambiguous division of labor across 
different tiers of government and has helped empower the municipality, which should be at the forefront 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 27 of 59 
 
of urban management and service delivery. Such an approach may hinder strategic and policy-level 
engagement such as national-level coordination of the drought response. The proposed second AF will 
aim to proactively involve the federal government, such as the Presidential Envoy for Drought Response, 
SODMA, MoLSA, and the Ministry of Health.  
45. 
Supporting operational efficiencies through centralized government-led coordination has 
proven useful. Relatedly, the World Bank supported the establishment of a federal PCU under the parent 
project to provide coordination support to the PIUs, technical backstopping, and quality control, while the 
municipal PIUs are responsible for the day-to-day planning and implementation. The establishment of the 
PCU has resulted in important steps for enhanced coordination, such as synchronization and realization 
of the potential of complementarity across activities and potential efficiencies through joint procurement 
and streamlined reporting. While further development of the PCU is still needed and should be supported, 
the newly established PCU-PIU arrangement has already improved coordination under the project while 
further clarifying the roles and responsibilities between national and subnational governments.  
46. 
Area-based approach allows for a coordinated approach that leverages different streams of 
support. The proposed AF takes an area-based approach where the scaled-up drought support continues 
to assist the same three cities supported under the ongoing SURP-II drought response. Such an approach 
allows building on ongoing support while integrating priority interventions to ensure that people are able 
to meet the most basic needs. The area-based approach maximizes donor coordination and a more 
comprehensive support while ensuring the efficient use of limited resources. It also helps with faster 
implementation as the activities can leverage the implementation arrangements that have already been 
established.  
47. 
Building on the gains made from the MRP can help maximize the effectiveness of the drought 
response. Drawing on lessons learned from the 2011/17 drought, IOM, UNICEF40, and WFP are piloting an 
MRP for IDPs in Somalia that includes a set of prioritized interventions that will ensure families are able 
to meet their most immediate needs over three to six months to withstand the impacts of the ongoing 
drought and enable their rapid recovery while building resilience to future shocks. To assess stakeholders’ 
perceptions of the MRP and its current and future role in the emergency response, a Learning Review was 
conducted by the third-party monitoring partner of the FCDO in September 2022. While the FCDO noted 
that the MRP’s focus on IDPs alone diverts attention away from marginalized clans and other social and 
ethnic groups that have the least ability to manage in an emergency, given progress to date, there is a 
general confidence that the MRP can address these technical issues enough to justify expansion. There is 
also an opportunity to build on the gains achieved in its first two phases, having reached 28,058 
households as of December 2022. 
I. 
Alignment with Higher Level Objectives 
48. 
The proposed drought response activities are aligned within relevant crisis response strategies 
and focus on lifesaving interventions for some of the most vulnerable and most affected population 
groups. While the Government does not have its own fully developed drought response strategy, partners 
and the FGS support the 2022 Humanitarian Response Plan and the DRFPP. The DRFPP prioritizes 
operational priority areas and integrated, thematic interventions to avert famine and mitigate and 
address excess mortality and morbidity, including food security, nutrition, health, and WASH. The 
 
40 UNICEF = United Nations Children’s Fund. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 28 of 59 
 
proposed project’s drought response will focus on prioritized activities, operational priority areas, and 
agreed assistance packages for newly displaced populations outlined in the 2022 DRFPP. The proposed 
multipurpose cash transfer is harmonized with the national Baxnaano Program in terms of beneficiary 
registration, levels of payment, and duration.  
49. 
The project’s drought response contributes to the World Bank’s twin goals of eliminating 
extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity through the provision of much-needed economic 
infrastructure and basic services for some of the world’s poorest and most vulnerable people in one of 
the most fragile countries. The drought response contributes to the WBG Country Partnership Framework 
(CPF) (FY19–22)41 for Somalia.42 CPF Focus Area 1 aims to strengthen institutions to deliver services while 
addressing the cross-cutting consideration of building resilience to fragility and shocks. The project’s 
drought response specifically aims to deliver on Strategic Objective 1.4 by building the capacity of Somali 
municipalities for urban resilience. The drought response activities will also complement investments in 
urban service delivery and capacity-building elements, the key IDA-funded projects that are already active 
in Somalia and are also responding to the drought by mobilizing and reallocating funding. These portfolio-
wide drought response investments will be synergistic and mutually reinforcing, leveraging existing 
coordination mechanisms. It also aligns with GCRF pillars (a) Responding to Food Insecurity and (b) 
Protecting People and Preserving Jobs, specifically through Component 4.  
50. 
The project’s drought response will also contribute to the Somalia National Development Plan 
(2020–2024) particularly for Pillar 4 on Social Development through (a) improved social protection, 
including urban planning and social benefits and (b) governance strengthening, including disaster risk 
management, local governance, and decentralized service delivery. The project will also contribute to 
Somalia’s need of US$48.5 billion investment in climate change adaptation between 2021 and 2030 
estimated in the country’s most recent Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC).43 
51. 
The drought response activities align with the IDA20 core priorities and the WBG’s fragility, 
conflict, and violence (FCV) strategy 2020-25. The FCV Special Theme of IDA20 aims to further strengthen 
IDA’s effectiveness in fragile and conflict-affected situations, supporting countries to escape the fragility 
trap and exploiting IDA’s comparative advantage at the security-development nexus. 
52. 
The project is aligned with the World Bank’s climate change and resilience agenda. In the Action 
Plan on Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience, the World Bank acknowledges the urgency of the 
development impacts of climate change, especially in FCV countries. It commits to scaling up adaptation 
efforts to build resilience against climate and disaster impacts, with a focus on interventions that directly 
target and engage with vulnerable population groups, informed by greater access to climate, weather, 
and hydrological information. 
III. KEY RISKS 
 
41 The Somalia Performance Learning Review 2022 for CPF FY19–22 (P173465) extends the CPF for one year through FY23 and 
adjusts the CPF to account for scaled IDA assistance; enhances support for institution building and service delivery critical to 
strengthening the social contract; and supports a green, resilient, and inclusive recovery from the triple crises, including 
through a deeper focus on human capital and foundational infrastructure. 
42 Discussed by the Board of Executive Directors on August 29, 2018. Report No. 12473-SO.  
43 The Federal Republic of Somalia (2021). Updated Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 29 of 59 
 
53. 
Somalia is one of the most difficult FCV environments in the world to operate in, with conflict 
and security, presenting serious challenges to project implementation. The World Bank will continue to 
provide intensive supervision and oversight to the PIUs at the municipal level, and efforts will be made to 
significantly strengthen federal-level implementation oversight, coordination, and supervision capacity 
through the PCU, not least to address issues of security risk management and GBV. In coordination with 
the Government, the World Bank will also continue to engage IOM to offer technical support and 
supervise implementation.  
54. 
The overall risk rating for SURP-II remains High. The risks that could adversely affect the project 
are contextual, political, institutional, and programmatic. The Government is familiar with the World Bank 
investment operations requirements, though its capacity at the federal, state, and municipal levels to 
manage the full lifecycle of project delivery and supervision activities remains generally weak. The SURP-
II PCU and municipal PIUs are gradually developing critical risk management skills through implementation 
of the project. The second AF will use the same risk mitigation measures as outlined in the PAD of the 
parent project. 
55. 
Political and governance risks are High. While the conclusion of the elections marks an important 
milestone in Somalia’s state-building process, resolving long-running tensions between the FGS and the 
FMSs will require dialogue, cooperation, and trust building. Continuous disputes among the political elite 
and insurgent attacks can distract efforts that are needed to achieve the project’s objectives. For the 
parent project, there are governance risks related to political interference in procurement of civil works 
and consultancy firms, and political interference in the recruitment of the PCU/PIU staff. Mitigating 
measures include regular communication on project activities, allocations, and processes with all levels of 
government, including through the Project Steering Committee; strong monitoring system using the 
TPMA; and placement of a probity adviser for some large-scale procurement activities and recruitment of 
project staff. For the drought response, the project will leverage existing partnerships through reputable 
third-party implementers and project coordination structures that support government-led planning and 
monitoring at multiple levels. In particular, the Government will engage IOM, which has strong fiduciary, 
E&S risk management, security risk management systems, a good track record working in Somalia, and a 
reputation as a relatively neutral party to mitigate the risks. Moreover, the recently appointed Special 
Envoy for Drought Response provides further opportunities for enhancing strategic coordination and 
troubleshooting for drought response. 
56. 
Macroeconomic risks are High. The Somali authorities have limited policy options to respond to 
multiple shocks such as extreme climatic events, the COVID-19 pandemic, the economic impacts of the 
war in Ukraine and regular security incidences. Economic growth is estimated at less than 2 percent in 
2022, leading to a continued decline in per capita growth rates, and inflation is close to 10 percent due to 
increases in commodity prices. Somalia is de facto dollarized and the Central Bank of Somalia has no 
monetary policy instruments. There is no fiscal space to allocate domestic resources to respond to shocks.  
Somalia is in debt distress following the accumulation of arrears for loans contracted prior to the civil war. 
The government is seeking debt relief through the HIPC initiative. The HIPC initiative is supporting a broad-
based reform program that aims to strengthen the macroeconomic framework, where performance is 
assessed through satisfactory reviews of the International Monetary Fund’s Extended Credit Facility 
program, which remains on track. Good progress is also being made in implementing HIPC Completion 
Point triggers that will strengthen the foundations for growth, domestic revenue mobilization, economic 
governance, and service delivery. These broad-based reforms are also being supported by the Somalia 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 30 of 59 
 
Inclusive Growth Development Policy Financing series (P174889) 44 and Somalia Second Inclusive Growth 
DPO (P179307) under preparation, which increase the government’s fiscal space to respond to the 
drought. Furthermore, the government is implementing the Sustainable Development Financing Policy 
through performance and policy actions that support improvements to domestic revenue mobilization 
and zero non-concessional borrowing.  
 
57. 
Technical design of project risk is Substantial. The field-level presence and technical experience 
of IOM and its reputable partners will maximize rapid implementation and benefits of the drought 
response activities. Given increasing water scarcity and demands, in coordination with partners, the 
project will integrate strong O&M of boreholes by forming and training community-based water 
committees on minor repairs and user fee collection. It will also monitor water resources through 
hydrological studies to ensure evidence-based and sustainable use based on current and future demands 
and relevant institutional arrangements. The scale-up of the humanitarian response calls for strengthened 
cash coordination based on market functionality, including at the subnational level. There is also a general 
call for the harmonization of approaches, specifically regarding transfer values and targeting approaches. 
The project is coordinating with the Baxnaano Program and the Cash Working Group (CWG) to ensure 
alignment. The following risk mitigation measures have been built in related to ECT: (a) apply a 
vulnerability index45 to identify zonal and sub-zonal priorities; (b) conduct door-to-door registration of all 
beneficiaries through Kobo toolbox and verification through community-based camp management 
committees; (c) biometrically register all drought-induced IDPs in each city using IOM’s BRAVE system 
which is inter-operable with the WFP’s SCOPE system (a beneficiary registration system for all the 
beneficiaries under the Baxnaano Program); (d) deliver cash through mobile payments; (e) jointly monitor 
service delivery using IOM’s TPMA, field staff, and digital tools, including IOM’s call center sampling 
verification, and (f) coordinate with the Baxnaano Program. On this last point, coordination with the 
Baxnaano Program will entail the following measures: (a) align the amounts and duration per household, 
(b) collect beneficiaries’ data using the common registration form adopted by the Baxnaano Program that 
can feed into the Government’s unified social registry as soon as the data security standards are met, and 
(c) target urban areas only (the Baxnaano Program focuses on rural areas with a planned small urban 
pilot). 
58. 
The institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risk is Substantial. Capacity and 
authority in Somalia are weak given the history of conflict and mistrust with public institutions. The risk, 
however, is rated Substantial given the extent of enhanced supervision and coordination through multiple 
levels of government, including nascent capacities and evolving emergency coordination architecture 
including the reemergence of SODMA. The project will leverage the standing capacity of IOM and its 
partners to facilitate rapid implementation. All the PIU staff will continue to receive regular training and 
support both through the project management and institutional strengthening component in the project. 
It will be critical to closely monitor the working relationship between the implementing partners and 
multiple levels of government and quickly mitigate any relationship challenges through established 
coordination mechanisms. 
 
44 The Project is SDR74.1 million and was approved by the World Bank Board on July 27, 2022.  
45 The index considers vulnerability of drought-induced IDP households, including (a) disability, (b) female, (c) elderly, (d) child-
headed, (e) chronic illness, (f) severe/moderate acute malnutrition, (g) separated children, (h) large household (7+), (i) length of 
displacement (last three months), (j) large number of children (4+), and (k) minority clan with limited humanitarian access. 
However, the only household selection criterion is ‘newly arriving drought-induced IDPs’ as the priority is to register IDPs and 
deliver aid as quickly as possible.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 31 of 59 
 
59. 
Fiduciary risks are High. The FM and procurement environment in Somalia are challenging, and 
fraud and corruption risks in the project are high given the significant amount of civil works being 
implemented. Although anti-corruption and public sector regulations are in place, problems persist, 
contributing to low levels of trust in government institutions. Mitigation measures for governance issues 
have been built into the project design with a strict fiduciary control mechanism and application of the 
World Bank fiduciary rules as well as a focus on social accountability. The project will ensure that the PIUs 
always have dedicated procurement and FM specialists in place and that the Project Implementation 
Manual (PIM) includes a well-described fiduciary management process. A monitoring agent further 
supports the MPF projects on managing fiduciary challenges. Moreover, the World Bank carried out a 
portfolio-wide review for Somalia to identify fraud and corruption mitigation measures that can be 
applied. 
60. 
Environment and social risks are High. Given the significant security risks associated with fragility 
and conflict-affected situations, including terrorism and sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA), sexual 
harassment (SH), and GBV risks, the social risks are High. Other social risks of the proposed second AF will 
include (a) risks associated with labor and working conditions such as occupational health and safety (OHS) 
risks, child labor, labor influx, and labor dispute; (b) exclusion of disadvantaged and vulnerable groups 
from project benefits and stakeholder engagement activities; and (c) increased tension/competition in 
the community over the limited project-related resources. These risks will be mitigated through the 
implementation of E&S instruments, adoption of appropriate mitigation measures to address SEA/SH, 
inclusion of disadvantaged and vulnerable groups in project activities/benefits including project-related 
job opportunities, effective stakeholder engagement (such as inclusive and transparent consultation 
process and functional GRM), and measures to minimize security risks. While no GBV incidents were 
reported during implementation of the parent project, the proposed second AF will continue to apply a 
robust and comprehensive risk management plan to address potential project-induced GBV/SEA/SH risks, 
and include the following measures to prevent or mitigate risks: integration of codes of conduct with 
GBV/SEA/SH-related protection for project workers, consultants, and contractors; community 
consultations, sensitization, and capacity-building activities to raise awareness of potential risks of 
GBV/SEA/SH and mitigation measures to be adopted; management of GBV and SEA/SH risks in the 
recruitment/retention of female workers; mapping of and collaboration with potential service providers 
in project-affected areas; development of an SEA/SH prevention and response action plan; hiring of a GBV 
service provider to support implementation of the SEA/SH action plan; and strengthening of the grievance 
mechanism with procedures and channels to enable safe, confidential, and ethical reporting of 
GBV/SEA/SH incidents. The GBV risks will be monitored throughout project implementation through 
regular reassessment, particularly as new project locations are determined, and through regular 
monitoring activities and third-party monitoring (TPM) to ensure that all parties are meeting their 
responsibilities. The environmental risks are Substantial. Because of the nature and relatively small scale 
of the civil works in the urban environment, the adverse environmental impacts from the proposed 
second AF will remain minor, temporary, and confined to the area immediately surrounding the 
construction. Anticipated environmental risks and impacts include dust generation, noise pollution, soil 
erosion, surface water sedimentation, traffic interruptions, pollution from construction wastes, and 
transmission of infectious diseases including COVID-19. These short-term impacts will be prevented or 
mitigated with standard operating procedures and good construction management practices including 
World Bank Good Practice Notes on COVID-19 Mitigation. 
61. 
Stakeholder risk is Substantial. The current context in Somalia, characterized by the lack of trust 
between key groups in society and the accompanying high levels of contestation and violence, presents 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 32 of 59 
 
substantial stakeholder risk for this project. For the drought response activities, the PCU will contract IOM, 
which has been operational in Somalia since 2007 and has a strong network of relationships with the 
Government and partners. Drought activities would also be coordinated through well-established 
humanitarian and development coordination mechanisms, such as the CCCM cluster and CWG, including 
with the FMS and strategic partnerships such as the EU, FCDO, and USAID.46 The respective municipalities 
and project coordinators and implementing partners will also play a key role in managing communications 
with stakeholders. Moreover, the project’s GRM would help manage grievances from communities, 
partners, and the private sector.  
62. 
Security risk, categorized under ‘Others’, is High. The project is considered to pose high security 
risks. Conflict and insecurity remain persistent challenges in Somalia, particularly considering the ongoing 
and scaled-up offensive against Al-Shabab, and have impeded delivery of services in the past. This general 
insecurity affects both project workers and beneficiaries and is further heightened by the insecurity in IDP 
sites, which pose a significant challenge for monitoring and supervising project implementation. These 
challenges prevent effective needs assessment, accurate identification and targeting of beneficiaries, 
meaningful community engagements, and application of grievance redress and other risk mitigation 
protocols. These gaps can exacerbate risks of elite capture, selection bias, and inaccuracies in capturing 
the impacts of the situation, especially for the most vulnerable. To address these risks, the World Bank 
projects leverage the use of implementing partners that have established robust capabilities for delivery 
and monitoring of these services. The project will take appropriate and proportionate security measures 
to minimize the potential risk to project workers and stakeholders. Key security measures will include 
security protection by public security personnel, restrictions on work hours where security risks are higher 
(such as nighttime), and measures to maintain low profile of the site and workers (such as the minimum 
use of sign boards). The implementing partners of the project will consist of a UN agency and international 
and national NGOs, who are already operating under the current security environments with their 
respective security risk management systems. The consistency with the relevant requirements of security 
risk management under the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) will be confirmed and additional 
measures will be applied, where necessary. Beyond these, the project maintains a responsive GRM to 
uptake, monitor, and respond to any concerns, including security related, from beneficiaries and project-
affected persons. Additionally, IOM is a leading implementing partner that uses community engagement 
and targeting approaches and dedicated communications strategies to avoid any status-based conflicts or 
frictions in the IDP response activities.  
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
A. Economic and Financial Analysis 
63. 
As part of preparation for this second AF, an economic and financial analysis (EFA) was conducted 
to determine the value of the anticipated benefits relative to the costs associated with this AF. This EFA 
examines potential returns of the project activities and investments, focusing on morbidity and mortality 
benefits expected from the investments under Component 4. The analysis also evaluates the anticipated 
return of the full SURP-II including this and the previous round of AF approved in July 2022. The net 
present value (NPV) including both rounds of AF is estimated at US$105 million at a 15 percent discount 
 
46 USAID = United States Agency for International Development. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 33 of 59 
 
rate, with an economic rate of return (ERR) of 30 percent. The estimated NPV and ERR for only this second 
AF is estimated at US$43.7 million and 29 percent, respectively. 
64. 
This EFA accounts for the benefits in Somalia as a result of the different investments under the 
project. The analysis of Component 4 (Response to Urban Forced Displacement) focuses on morbidity and 
mortality rate improvements due to the support provided by the activities under this component. To 
calculate this rate of return, the monetary benefits of these different investments were estimated. The 
analysis for this component builds upon methodology used for other similar types of projects, including 
those applied in an FCV context. For this analysis, these benefits have been monetized as the income of 
the project investments—therein applying the discounted cash flow model for financial analysis of private 
investments within the context of a World Bank-financed project. The proposed AF allocation for project 
management (Component 3) and institutional strengthening (Component 2) have been included as costs 
because these investments will help enable the progress of Component 4 and its subsequent benefits. 
B. Technical 
65. 
The project’s technical appraisal confirms the need for an immediate scaled-up drought 
response in strategically important cities. The appraisal validated that the ongoing investments under 
the parent project are sensible and technically feasible and their scaling-up will significantly aid in the 
ongoing emergency response while contributing to urban resilience. The addition of a new dedicated 
drought component, which merges the ongoing CERC activities and new CRW-ERF funding will support 
streamlined management and monitoring of the project’s drought activities. The proposed drought 
response activities are fully aligned within relevant crisis response strategies and lessons learned and 
focus on lifesaving interventions for some of the most vulnerable and most affected population groups. 
This is especially the case in SURP-II target cities that continue to receive large inflow of IDPs, returnees, 
and economic migrants who add pressure to demands for urban services. 
66. 
The implementation arrangements under the second AF will build on existing third-party 
implementation arrangements and engage new partners to increase the project’s absorption and 
technical capacity, which will also be enhanced. It will also strengthen government-led coordination and 
evidence-based decision-making for decentralized urban service delivery and longer-term development 
solutions through HLP and small-scale urban infrastructure activities. The drought response will also link 
to climate-resilient urban infrastructure investments under the parent project, such as roads that increase 
access to IDP sites, to maximize synergies and resilience building. Moreover, beneficiaries will be added 
to the safety net system database contributing to the building of a shock-responsive safety net system 
that also contributes to resilience. However, the project will need to coordinate closely with other donors 
to ensure alignment of transfer values in the project target areas. 
67. 
The project’s drought response will support a coordinated effort across the FGS and World Bank 
programming. As described previously, the FGS, in partnership with the World Bank, is responding to the 
escalating drought by mobilizing and reallocating funding through existing programming across six 
projects. This includes coordination with the SCRP focused on rural livelihoods and water activities 
nationally, as well as other WBG drought programming, providing support in rural areas to mitigate the 
need to migrate to urban areas and also facilitate returns to places of origin, when feasible. These 
operations are also working through similar implementation partners, such as WFP, IOM, and BRCIS, 
which offer opportunities for synergies and cost sharing. To facilitate information sharing and 
collaboration across the WBG, the World Bank developed a digital mapping of the WBG-supported 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 34 of 59 
 
drought response activities. These efforts will need to be sustained and scaled and lessons documented 
and shared. 
68. 
There is a need to retain flexibility to adapt to the dynamic and evolving context. However, 
Somalia’s emergency context is dynamic, and food security and funding situation may change. Having a 
criteria-based, city-wise allocation formula that is adjusted at the time of actual funding with the latest 
information will help enable this flexibility. It is also technically compatible with the project’s approach to 
support government-led and evidence-based decision-making introduced in the parent project, 
supporting enhanced trust and legitimacy of government institutions.47 In addition, conditions—
particularly, but not only, those related to security—may make the implementation of project activities 
difficult or even impossible. They will certainly add to the costs. Therefore, the feasibility of at least some 
of the proposed project activities is difficult to determine at the outset. This might necessitate a slight 
reduction in the scope of activities should the true costs escalate. Further, despite the support under the 
proposed grant, there will remain significant funding gaps for target sectors, which require the World 
Bank and partners to continue exploring potential synergies and additional funding through pipeline 
and/or new programming.  
69. 
The proposed second AF has undergone the required climate and disaster risk screening and 
has been assessed for climate co-benefits. The investments under this project will provide substantial 
climate co-benefits because (a) the provision of integrated emergency support will help address food 
security and other drivers of excess mortality, thereby improving their capacity to cope and recover from 
the drought crisis; (b) the infrastructure investments themselves will be designed and constructed in a 
resilient manner; and (c) the strengthening of government capacities will help coordinate and prepare for 
current and changing climate conditions. 
C. Financial Management 
70. 
The FM residual risk is assessed as Substantial. The AF will leverage and rely on the FM 
arrangements of the parent SURP-II. This includes arrangements for planning and budgeting, accounting 
systems and capacity, internal control, and oversight in addition to procedures for funds flow, financial 
reporting, and external audit. In line with the arrangements for use of country systems applicable across 
the portfolio, the AF will continue to support these initiatives.  
71. 
Project FM system. The project’s FM arrangements will continue to be managed by dedicated FM 
units (External Assistance Fiduciary Section [EAFS]) established within the Office of the Accountant 
General at the FGS and Ministries of Finance in each of the five states of Jubbaland State (Kismayo), 
Puntland State (Garowe), South West State (Baidoa), Galmudug State (Dhusamareb), and Hirshabelle 
State (Beledweyne). The PIUs will work closely with each of the respective EAFS units to prepare and 
submit the project’s annual work plan, budget, and cash flow forecast to the World Bank for review and 
clearance before the final estimates are incorporated in the annual appropriation and budgets. Budget 
utilization reports will be prepared from the FM system as part of the internal government(s) periodic 
reports and quarterly reports submitted to the World Bank. The project expenditures will be recognized, 
captured, analyzed, summarized, and reported on cash basis. These will be supported with appropriate 
records and documentation to track commitments and to safeguard assets. 
 
47 Under the first AF, the project introduced a city-wise allocation formula based on participating cities needs and performance. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 35 of 59 
 
Figure 7. Project FM 
 
72. 
Financial reporting and audit. All the project FM records will be maintained through the system. 
The existing PIM for SURP-II will be updated to respond to the additional peculiarities of the AF. This is in 
addition to specific internal controls related to internal and independent review and approval of works, 
interim payments certificates, authentication and management of contracts security documents, 
calculation and retirement of retention amounts, and measures to mitigate potential penalties already in 
place under the parent project. The EAFS units and PIUs will also ensure that the contracts are consistent 
with the invoices and payment requests before processing. The EAFS, in consultation with the PIUs at the 
FMS, will prepare quarterly interim financial reports (IFRs) covering all project funds for monitoring the 
implementation of the project and submit them through the Client Connection Portal to the World Bank 
within 45 days of the end of each fiscal quarter, but the periodicity shall be revised based on the project’s 
fiduciary risk rating. The IFRs will be generated directly from the core PFM systems (Financial Management 
Information System). The Office of the Auditor General at the FGS will carry out annual independent audit 
of the project. The audited project annual financial statements and Management Letters, together with 
any additional information required, will be submitted to the World Bank within six months after the end 
of the financial year.  
73. 
The FM arrangements supporting the implementation of additional activities under the newly 
introduced Component 4 (Response to Urban Forced Displacement) will be reflected in a revised 
outputs agreement between IOM and the FGS. This will include a detailed budget for the activities, which 
will form the basis for disbursements and expenditures. Disbursements to the UN agency will be based on 
specific outputs and deliverables reflected in the signed agreement. The project will rely on the internal 
control arrangements maintained by IOM to safeguard World Bank resources under the AF. For the high-
risk ECT, IOM will engage relevant structures and partners to ensure effective delivery and mitigate 
potential risks. To minimize the risk of fraud and corruption in targeting and enrolment of beneficiaries, 
IOM will engage the WFP as a strategic partner to conduct de-duplicating of registered beneficiaries and 
ensure that they are not already registered under SCOPE and are already receiving assistance. This will 
mitigate the risk of double dipping. The WFP will also ensure appropriate post distribution monitoring of 
ECT to confirm receipt of benefits by the intended beneficiaries. IOM’s internal and external audit 
arrangements will provide effective fiduciary oversight of funds channeled through the UN agency.  
Payments 
Reports and 
information 
Payments 
Reports
Payment
Funds disbursement 
MPF/IDA  
World Bank 
Designated Bank Account 
Each for FGS, FMSs, and 
Puntland) (Acceptable 
Financial Institution)  
EAFS Units  
(Office of the Accountant 
General)  
PIUs 
Banking 
data 
Vendor payments 
(Consultants, contractors, and so on) 
Withdrawal 
applications 
Direct payments 
Project Account (each for 
Kismayo, Dhu, Bele, and Baidoa 
Municipalities) 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 36 of 59 
 
74. 
Flow of funds and banking arrangements. Proceeds of the AF will be disbursed to the existing 
Designated Account (DA) for the parent project at the Central Bank of Somalia. Similarly, the existing 
Project Accounts (PAs) at the state level will be used to make payments in the states. Funds transfers from 
the DA to the state PA will be based on approved cash flow and subsequently accounted through the 
Statement of Expenditures.  
75. 
Disbursements to IOM will be made through the UN advance method as has been the case 
under the parent project. IOM will continue to submit quarterly IFRs to the PCU within 30 days of the end 
of the quarter for review, copying the respective PIUs. The PCU will in turn submit the consolidated 
quarterly IFR to the World Bank within 45 days after the end of the quarter. Disbursements in respect of 
other project components will be made by the PCU, and the funds will be deposited into the DA from 
where payments will be made for project activities. The project will also make direct payments to various 
service providers under Component 1. Figure 8 summarizes the funds flow arrangements for the project. 
Figure 8. Funds Flow 
 
Note: QPRs = Quarterly financial reports. 
76. 
Staffing. Kismayo, Garowe, Dhusamareb, Beledweyne, and Baidoa municipal governments will 
work closely with the state EAFS teams to carry out the project FM functions. The implementing agencies’ 
FM staff will work closely with the respective Ministries of Finance at the state level to ensure that the 
project activities are well recorded and incorporated in government budget and financial statements. 
Options will be explored in the recruitment of external FM staff through states’ Civil Service Commissions 
to support the project activities and PFM capacities of the municipalities. 
77. 
Fraud and corruption. The possibility of circumventing the internal control system with colluding 
practices such as bribes and abuse of administrative positions is a critical issue and may include (a) 
complex accounting and internal controls inherent with construction work contracts, particularly 
management of contracts, security documents, retentions, penalties, and payments certificates; (b) poor 
filing and records; (c) nascent intergovernmental fiscal relations between the FGS, states, and 
municipalities; (d) lack of budget discipline; (e) unauthorized commitment to suppliers, bypassing budget 
and expenses vetting procedures; (f) uncertainty over the banking arrangements supporting the project; 
(g) potential exposure to money laundering; and (h) insecurity and political instability. These are mitigated 
as follows: (a) specific aspects on corruption auditing will be included in the external audit and monitoring 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II Second Additional Financing (P179775) 
 
 
December 8, 2022 
Page 37 of 59 
 
arrangements’ terms of reference, (b) FM procedures (as part of the EAFS Manual or COAPM48 and PIM) 
will be approved within six months after effectiveness and in operation for the project, (c) strong FM 
arrangements will be enforced (including qualified project accountants in the EAFS units), (d) periodic IFRs 
will be submitted including budget execution and monitoring, (e) measures to improve social 
accountability and transparency will be built into the project design by ensuring that project reports are 
available to the public, and (f) annual PFM forums will be held. The external audit will pay special attention 
to the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements due to fraud, in line with ISA49 240 (the 
auditor’s responsibilities relating to fraud in an audit of financial statements). 
D. Procurement 
78. 
Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the requirements in the World Bank 
Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers: Procurement in Investment Project Financing Goods, Works, 
Non-Consulting and Consulting Services, dated July 1, 2016, and updated November 2020 (hereafter 
referred to as Procurement Regulations); Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption 
in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants (revised as of July 1, 2016); and provisions 
stipulated in the Financing Agreement. 
79. 
Procurement implementation arrangements. The existing procurement implementation 
arrangements of the project will be maintained and strengthened under the proposed AF. The PCU/PIUs 
are already staffed with project coordinators and procurement specialists among other key staff. The 
same PCU/PIUs will be responsible for implementation of the procurement activities under the AF. An 
adequate number of officials dealing in procurement in the PCU/PIUs, either directly or indirec