 
 Document of 
The World Bank 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD5584  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT PAPER 
ON A  
PROPOSED THIRD ADDITIONAL GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 30.2 MILLION 
(US$40 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
AND A PROPOSED GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$10 MILLION 
 
FROM THE SOMALIA MULTI-PARTNER FUND 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
 
FOR THE 
SOMALIA URBAN RESILIENCE PROJECT PHASE II 
 
April 19, 2024 
 
 
 
Urban, Resilience, And Land Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
 
 
 
 
  
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective February 29, 2024) 
Currency Unit =  
SDR 
SDR 0.75 =  
US$1 
       US$1.32 =   
 
SDR 1 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Victoria Kwakwa 
Country Director: Keith E. Hansen 
Regional Director: Iain G. Shuker 
Practice Manager: Peter D. Ellis 
Task Team Leader: Thalyta Ernandya Yuwono 
 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AM
Accountability Mechanism
AF
Additional Financing
AS
Al-Shabab
BRA
Benadir Regional Administration
CERC
Contingent Emergency Response Component
CPF
Country Partnership Framework
DED
Detailed Engineering Designs
E&S
Environmental and Social
EAFS
External Assistance Fiduciary Section
ERR
Economic Rate of Return
FCV
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence
FS
Feasibility Study
FGS
Federal Government of Somalia
FMS
Federal Member State
FM
Financial Management
FRM
Flood Risk Management
GEMS
Geo-Enabling Initiative for Monitoring and Supervision
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
GRM
Grievance Redress Mechanism
GRS
Grievance Redress Service
IDA
International Development Association
IDP
Internally Displaced Person
IOM
International Organization for Migration
ISM
Implementation Support Mission
ISR
Implementation Status and Results Report
MS
Moderately Satisfactory
M&E
Monitoring and Evaluation
MoPWRH
Ministry of Public Works, Reconstruction, and Housing
MPF
Multi-Partner Fund for Somalia
NBS
Nature-Based Solutions
NPV
Net Present Value
O&M
Operation and Maintenance
PCU
Project Coordination Unit
PDO
Project Development Objective
PIU
Project Implementation Unit
SEF
Stakeholder Engagement Framework
SURP-II
Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase Two
SMPF
Somalia Multi-Partner Fund
AF3
Third Additional Financing
UNOPS
United Nations Office for Project Services
 
 
 
SOMALIA 
 
SOMALIA URBAN RESILIENCE PROJECT PHASE II - THIRD ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
  
I. 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING ........................................ 8 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING .................................................................... 11 
III. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 17 
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................................. 19 
V. WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS .............................................................................. 22 
VI    SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES ..................................................................................... 24 
VII   DETAILED CHANGE(S) .................................................................................................... 24 
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 28 
 
  
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 41 
 
 
       
BASIC INFORMATION – PARENT (Somalia Urban Resilience Project II - P170922) 
 
 
 
Country 
Product Line 
Team Leader(s) 
Somalia
IBRD/IDA
Thalyta Ernandya Yuwono
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Resp CC 
Req CC 
Practice Area (Lead) 
P170922
Investment Project 
Financing 
SAEU3 (10208)
AECE2 (6542)
Urban, Resilience and Land
  
Implementing Agency: Garowe Municipality/ Puntland, Dhusamareb/Galmudug, Beledweyne/Hirshabelle, Baidoa 
Municipality/South West State, Benadir Regional Administration, Ministry of Public Works, Kismayo 
Municipality/Jubbaland, BeletWeyne/Hirshabelle, Dhusamareeb/Galgaduud 
 ADD FIN TBL1
Is this a regionally tagged 
project? 
 
No 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
 
No 
 
Approval Date 
Closing Date 
Expected 
Guarantee 
Expiration Date
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
09-Dec-2019
31-Dec-2026
High
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Parent 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach [MPA] 
[✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 41 
 
 
Development Objective(s)
 
To strengthen public service delivery capacity of local governments, increase access to climate-resilient urban 
infrastructure and services, and to provide immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or emergency in 
selected areas. 
 
Ratings (from Parent ISR) 
 RATING_DRAFT_
NO
 
Implementation 
Latest ISR 
 
20-Dec-2021
28-Jun-2022
29-Nov-2022
10-Jan-2023
21-Jun-2023
06-Dec-2023
Progress towards 
achievement of 
PDO 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Overall 
Implementation 
Progress (IP) 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Overall ESS 
Performance 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
Overall Risk
H 
 
H 
 
H 
 
H 
 
H 
 
H 
 
Financial 
Management 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Project 
Management 
MS 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Procurement
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
MS 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing -
P181512) 
 
ADDFIN_TABLE
Project ID 
Project Name 
Additional Financing Type 
Urgent Need or Capacity 
Constraints 
P181512
Somalia Urban Resilience 
Restructuring, Scale Up
Yes
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 41 
 
Project II Third Additional 
Financing 
Financing instrument 
Product line 
Approval Date
Investment Project 
Financing 
IBRD/IDA
30-Apr-2024
Projected Date of Full 
Disbursement 
Bank/IFC Collaboration  
 
 
30-Apr-2027
No
 
 
Is this a regionally tagged project?
 
No
 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Child 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
[✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
 
 Disbursement Summary (from Parent ISR) 
 
Source of Funds 
Net 
Commitments
Total Disbursed
Remaining Balance
Disbursed 
IBRD
 
%
IDA
120.00
 56.91
 63.31
 
47 %
Grants
 83.50
 37.74
 45.76
 
45 %
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional 
Financing - P181512) 
  
 
 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 41 
 
SUMMARY (Total Financing) 
 
Current Financing 
Proposed Additional 
Financing 
Total Proposed 
Financing 
Total Project Cost 
203.50 
50.00 
253.50
Total Financing 
203.50 
50.00 
253.50
of which IBRD/IDA  
120.00 
40.00 
160.00
Financing Gap 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
 
DETAILSNewFinEnh1- Additional Financing
World Bank Group Financing
     International Development Association (IDA) 
40.00
          IDA Grant 
40.00
Non-World Bank Group Financing 
     Trust Funds 
10.00
          Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
10.00
   
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions)
 Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
SML Amount 
Guarantee 
Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
0.00 
  40.00 
0.00 
   0.00 
  40.00 
National 
Performance-Based 
Allocations (PBA) 
0.00 
  40.00 
0.00 
   0.00 
  40.00 
Total 
0.00 
40.00 
   0.00 
   0.00 
40.00 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
Does the project require any other Policy waiver(s)? 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 41 
 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
 
ESStandards 
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards
Relevance
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
Relevant
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure
Relevant
Labor and Working Conditions
Relevant
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
Relevant
Community Health and Safety
Relevant
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
Relevant
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Relevant
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant
Cultural Heritage
Relevant
Financial Intermediaries
Not Currently Relevant
ESStandardsNote 
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Urban, Resilience and Land 
 
Contributing Practice Areas 
 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks
 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 41 
 
PROJECT TEAM 
 
 
Bank Staff 
Name 
Role 
Specialization 
Unit 
Thalyta Ernandya Yuwono 
Team Leader (ADM 
Responsible) 
Urban Specialist 
SAEU3 
Francis Akolu Muthuiya 
Procurement Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Procurement Specialist 
EAERU 
Stephen Diero Amayo 
Financial Management 
Specialist (ADM Responsible) 
Financial Management 
EAEG1 
Leonard Mutuku Matheka 
Financial Management 
Specialist 
Financial Management 
Specialist 
EAEG1 
Abdirahman Zeila Dubow 
Environmental Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Environmental Specialist 
SAEE2 
Jacinta Achote Murunga 
Social Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Social safeguards 
SAES2 
Alidu Babatu Adam 
Team Member 
Social Development 
SAES2 
Anna Charlotte O'Donnell 
Peer Reviewer 
Social Development 
SSAS2 
Benjamin Joseph Kushner 
Team Member 
DRM Specialist 
SAEU3 
Christine Khasiro 
Wesakania 
Team Member 
Team Assistant 
AEMSO 
Eric Walter Maina 
Team Member 
Team Assistant 
AEMSO 
Evarist F. Baimu 
Counsel 
Legal 
LEGAM 
George Ferreira Da Silva 
Team Member 
Finance officer 
WFACS 
Joshua Mutiso Kioko 
Team Member 
Financial Management 
EAEG1 
Martin M. Serrano 
Counsel 
Legal 
LEGAM 
Melody Joy Benavidez 
Team Member 
urban planning 
SAEU3 
Miguel Angel De Corral 
Martin 
Team Member 
FCV 
GTFS2 
Mohammad Ilyas Butt 
Procurement Team 
Procurement 
EAERU 
Nikolai Alexei Sviedrys 
Wittich 
Procurement Team 
STEP 
EAWP2 
Nisha Maria Pinho 
Team Member 
Finance Analyst 
WFACS 
Puja Guha 
Team Member 
Economist 
SAEE3 
Rildo Santos 
Team Member 
 
SAEU2 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 41 
 
Samuel Ngethe Mbachia 
Team Member 
Engineer 
SAEU3 
Sarah Louise Cramer Smith 
Team Member 
FCV and M&E 
GTFS2 
Soraya Goga 
Team Member 
Urban Specialist 
SAEU3 
Tahir Akbar 
Peer Reviewer 
Urban FCV Specialist 
SSAU1 
Zishan Faiza Karim 
Peer Reviewer 
Urban Specialist 
SMNUR 
 
Extended Team 
Name 
Title 
Organization 
Location 
   
 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 41 
 
I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
 
Background 
1. 
This Project Paper seeks approval of the Board of Executive Directors for a proposed additional 
grant from the International Development Association (IDA) in the amount of SDR 30.2 million (US$40 
million equivalent) for the Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase II or “Nagaad”1 Project (SURP-II, 
P170922). The project will also receive a co-financing grant from the Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
(SMPF)2 in the amount of US$10 million. The original grant of US$112 million (SDR 82.15 million) was 
approved on December 19, 2019, and became effective on February 24, 2020. The first additional 
financing (AF) (P178887) of US$41.5 million (US$21.5 million from the SMPF and US$20 million from IDA) 
was declared effective on July 14, 2022.3 The second AF (P179775) of US$50 million from IDA financed by 
the Crisis Response Window (CRW)-Early Response Financing (ERF) for Somalia was declared effective on 
January 16, 2023. Taken together, SURP-II will have a total budget envelope of US$253.5 this million, with 
a closing date of December 31, 2026.4  
 
2. 
The proposed third additional financing (AF3) entails several key changes: the scale-up of: (i) 
Component 1 by adding US$47 million for additional preparatory activities and investments for flood risk 
management (FRM) in the six cities5 supported under the project; (ii) Component 2 by adding US$1 million 
for government-led analytical work to inform potential urban stabilization investments in the Federal 
Member States (FMS) of Hirshabelle and Galmudug; and (iii) Component 3 by adding US$2 million for the 
six Project Implementation Units (PIUs) to manage additional infrastructure investments. The results 
frameworks will be revised accordingly, and the closing dates of all three grants (TF0B1409, TF0B1519, 
and TF0B8532) will be extended from December 31, 2024, to December 31, 2026, to align with the project 
closing date. 
 
3. 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen public service delivery capacity of local 
governments, increase access to climate-resilient urban infrastructure and services, and to provide 
immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or emergency in selected areas.  
 
4. 
SURP-II comprises four components designed to strengthen resilience and governance in key 
cities. SURP-II supports participatory decision-making processes to identify key urban investments that 
advance urban resilience in six strategically important cities across five FMS and the Benadir Regional 
Administration (BRA). These include the cities of Mogadishu (BRA), Garowe (Puntland State), Baidoa 
(Southwest State), Kismayo (Jubbaland State), Dhusamareb (Galmudug State), and Beledweyene 
 
1 Meaning ‘prosperous settlement’ in Somali language. 
2 The Somalia MPF provided co-financing to support SURP-II to scale up climate smart urban infrastructure investments and investing in 
institutional capacity using government system.  
3 The processing of US$20 million was to replenish funds which were reallocated to Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response to respond 
to the worsening drought. The current US$153.5 million is financed by an IDA grant of US$70 million, as well as three trust fund grants under 
the Somalia Multi-Partner Fund (SMPF) (TF0B1409, TF0B1519, and TF0B8532) in the amount of US$45 million, US$17 million, and US$21.5 
million. 
4 Under the first AF, the closing date was extended by 24 months to December 31, 2026, to allow for adequate completion of the CERC. The 
dedicated drought response component (Component 4) was introduced under the second AF and the funds from the CERC added to the new 
component. 
5 Spanning five FMS and Benadir Regional Administration (BRA), the six cities are Mogadishu (BRA), Garowe (Puntland State), Baidoa (South-
West State), Kismayo (Jubaland State), Dhusamareb (Galmudug State), and Beledweyne (Hirshabelle State). 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 41 
 
(Hirshabelle State). The project helps strengthen the country’s public financial management (PFM) 
systems by tracking the project funds on the government’s budget while also helping strengthen 
institutional arrangements and capacities that underpin municipal functionality and its relationships 
within the Somali Government and with external actors. The four components are as follows: 
 
Component 1: Urban Infrastructure and Services supports preparation and implementation of 
infrastructure investments. Participatory decision-making is used to identify investments.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Analytics strengthens core municipal functions 
through technical assistance on informal settlements, climate-resilient operation, and maintenance 
(O&M), urban governance, solid waste management, and mayors’ forums.  
 
Component 3: Project Management and Capacity Building supports project management costs, 
including monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and capacity building of the Project Coordination Unit 
(PCU), PIUs, and relevant municipal staff. 
 
Component 4: Response to Urban Forced Displacement provides urgent support to drought-induced 
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and host communities to reduce the strain on urban areas. 
 
Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response allows for rapid reallocation of uncommitted 
project funds to address eligible emergency needs in the event of a natural or man-made crisis. 
 
5. 
Implementation status. Progress towards achievement of PDO is rated Satisfactory, and Overall 
Implementation Progress is rated Moderately Satisfactory (MS). The project has maintained both ratings 
above MS for the past 12 months. Despite operating in a complex operating environment, the project is 
successfully being implemented in six strategic cities. In response to the 2021-2022 drought crisis, the 
project is providing integrated multi-sector interventions to alleviate pressure on limited urban services 
and mitigate social tension.6 The project has effective municipal PIUs; a PCU at the federal Ministry of 
Public Works, Reconstruction, and Housing (MoPWRH); and a Federal Government of Somalia (FGS)/FMS 
Inter-ministerial Project Steering Committees. The project is compliant with key legal covenants. 
 
6. 
As of April 2024, cumulative disbursement is US$94.65 million (46 percent of the total US$203.5 
million grant). The project drought response is focusing on key urban areas and contributing to the World 
Bank’s overall drought response through support on housing, land, and property (HLP)7 and basic services 
(water, sanitation, and hygiene [WASH] and/or health) in Mogadishu, Baidoa, and Garowe that are already 
seeing a large inflow of IDPs triggered by the 2022/23 drought. Drought response activities (Component 
4) will be completed by September 2024, and most ongoing civil works in Mogadishu, Baidoa, Kismayo, 
and Garowe (Component 1) will be completed by the end of 2025. Dhusamareb and Beledweyne, the two 
cities that joined the project through the first AF, have commenced civil works’ designs, with an expected 
start and end dates of February 2025 and June 2026, respectively. Somalia has difficulties attracting 
internationally reputable and competent contractors due to access challenges. Future delays in 
implementation are possible due to deteriorating security. SURP-II has helped better define 
intergovernmental functional roles and responsibilities related to urban services. With relatively strong 
implementation arrangements and broad geographic coverage, SURP-II has further evolved to support 
the Government’s ongoing drought response in urban areas through government systems and leadership. 
 
6 The second AF added Component 4. The FGS engaged the International Organization for Migration (IOM) through an output agreement in Sept 
2022, amended in April 2023. 
7 Includes site planning, legal support for IDPs to obtain individual land titles, and service provision within government designated IDP 
resettlement sites (Garowe and Baidoa). For IDPs living on private lands, support to obtain long-term lease agreements with private landowners 
in exchange for basic services is being provided. 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 41 
 
This demonstrates that SURP-II has succeeded in establishing a platform for urban service delivery at the 
municipal level.  
 
Rationale for Additional Financing 
 
7. 
Urban flood risk has emerged as one of the most serious threats and highest priorities across 
SURP-II cities.8 The El Niño Southern Oscillation influences Somalia’s climate variability, bringing more 
rainfall and flooding during El Niño and droughts in La Niña years.9 Somalia has endured multiple severe 
drought episodes since 196510 and is currently recovering from its worst drought in 40 years. Long dry 
spells degrade the topsoil, increasing the risk of flash flooding during rainy seasons. Climate-related shocks 
are occurring in increasingly quick succession, leaving little time for Somalis to recover.11 Additionally, 
projected sea level rise may cause saline intrusion in Somalia’s coastal waterways and groundwater 
reservoirs, rendering water unusable, especially in coastal cities, including Mogadishu and Kismayo.12 
These climate trends underline the need for investments in drainage and water management systems 
that can help Somalia better steward its water resources. 
 
8. 
Climate-induced displacement from rural areas to cities, including the six strategic cities 
participating in SURP-II, is accelerating unplanned urbanization. The majority of Somalia’s estimated 3.8 
million IDPs have self-settled in over 2,400+ IDP sites in urban and peri-urban areas across Somalia in 
pursuit of better access to humanitarian aid, urban services, and livelihood opportunities. Consequently, 
about twenty percent of today’s urban population are estimated to be IDPs.13 Yet, the majority of IDPs 
live in precarious conditions with a limited ability to meet their basic needs due to inconsistent service 
provision and/or social exclusion.14 Recent flood events highlight how IDPs displaced from conflict and 
drought are at risk of secondary displacement from flooding.  
 
9. 
Increasingly frequent environmental shocks interact with the long-running security crisis to 
severely strain both Somali society and the capacity of the international community’s humanitarian 
response. People in Somalia are enduring conflict and widespread insecurity related to an ongoing 
offensive against Al-Shabab (AS). In early 2022, the first major offensive against the group in a decade. 
The security situation in both FMS is further exacerbated by complex intercommunal conflict dynamics. 
Areas that have thus far been recovered have small populations, poor connections to major urban areas, 
significant access constraints, limited or no public services, and remain highly vulnerable to AS influence 
and attacks.  
 
10. 
Rationale for Additional Financing. The primary objective of the proposed additional financing of 
the SURP-II is to respond to the request of the Government of Somalia in November 2023 to scale 
investments in drainage in six cities highly exposed to flood risks. It will also help address unmet urban 
infrastructure needs and priorities identified by key municipalities confronting rapid and unplanned 
 
8 Somalia is the world's most climate-vulnerable country (ND-GAIN index) 
9 Adelphi. Weathering Risk: Climate Risk Profile Somalia. 2023. 
10 World Bank. Climate Change Knowledge Portal – Somalia Profile. 2023. 
11 GFDRR. Somalia Country Profile. Accessed in 2023. 
12 Climate Analytics. From droughts to floods: how Eastern African countries are responding to the rising El Niño and Indian Ocean Dipole. 
October 2023. 
13 IOM Displacement Tracking Matrix (2023).  
14 Camp Coordination and Camp Management Cluster (CCCM) Somalia Overview. UNHCR. 2023. 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 41 
 
urbanization and displacement to cities. Roads and ancillary drains, stand-alone trunk drainage, bridges, 
etc., are already included in the SURP-II and therefore do not constitute an addition to the project, but 
rather reflect a scaling up of existing activities and an added focus on flood risk management. This will 
complement and leverage completed and ongoing preparatory activities, such as citywide flood risk 
assessments and pre-feasibility studies of citywide drainage systems and strengthen the sustainability of 
infrastructure investments and will align project investments more strongly with broader national and 
sub-national disaster risk management and development strategies, policies, and priorities. The proposed 
additional financing will leverage project activities consistent with the original objectives and activities of 
SURP-II, such as labor-intensive work, capacity building, climate change adaption and mitigation, and 
introduce new activities, such as nature-based solutions, while building on the project’s strengths and 
lessons learned (See Section H, Lessons Learned).  
 
11. 
Alternatives to additional financing were considered, such as development of a new program. 
Given Somalia’s volatile FCV context, including an ongoing offensive against Al-Shabab, continuing flood 
and drought recovery crisis, a controversial and unsettled constitutional process, discussions with the 
Government of Somalia were not feasible to develop a new program before the end of the project. In 
addition, urgent action is needed to address flooding in cities, which is perpetually causing immense 
damages to people and economies, while leveraging existing project arrangements and preparatory 
works. The additional financing is considered the best option given (a) the need to continue critical 
support to public institutions and governance reforms (using intergovernmental funds transfer) to provide 
municipalities resources to deliver on their mandates, and (b) the need to assist key cities holistically with 
climate resilient urban infrastructure and services.  
 
II. DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
A. Summary of the Proposed Changes  
12. 
The proposed changes under the SURP-II AF3 are detailed in Table 1. 
Table 1. Summary of Proposed Changes under AF3 
Activities 
Proposed Changes 
Component 1: Urban Infrastructure and 
Services  
Add US$47 million to scale-up FRM-related infrastructure 
investments across the existing six cities  
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening 
and Analytics 
Add US$1 million for government-led scoping and analytical work on 
potential stabilization investments in Hirshabelle and Galmudug. 
Component 3: Project Management and 
Capacity building  
Add US$2 million for the six PIUs to manage additional infrastructure 
investments and analytics. 
Changes to the Results Framework 
Increase end targets from 5,000 to 1,000,000 for PDO indicator 
“People with improved access to climate-resilient urban 
infrastructure and services (% female, % IDPs, % host communities) 
(Number) and end target of selected intermediate results indicators. 
One additional intermediate indicator proposed “Length of trunk 
drainage improved by the project (Kilometers) end target 22.4 km, to 
reflect proposed new investments. 
Changes to closing date of three existing 
RETFs 
Extend the closing dates of three RETFs to align with the project 
closing date.  
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 41 
 
Activities 
Proposed Changes 
Revise names of two existing 
implementing agencies 
Revise and/or correction Beletweyne/Hirshabelle to 
Beledweyne/Hirshabelle. Revise and/or correction 
Dhusamareeb/Galgaduud to Dhusamareb/Galmudug.  
 
B. Project Development Objective 
 
13. 
The PDO will remain unchanged. The PDO remains the same as under the parent project and is 
to strengthen public service delivery capacity of local governments, increase access to climate-resilient 
urban infrastructure and services, and to provide immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or 
emergency in selected areas. 
 
C. Project Components and Costs 
 
14. 
Component 1: Urban Infrastructure and Services (US$155 million, of which IDA US$74 million). 
The allocation will be increased from US$108 million to US$155 million, scaling up resilient FRM 
infrastructure and services,15 such as road drainage, stand-alone trunk drainage, and detention ponds 
constructed in line with international standards16 and contributing to urban stormwater collection, 
drainage, and flood protection. The component will also finance pedestrian walkways and solar 
streetlights along proposed roads and support nature-based solutions (NBS), such as mangrove 
reforestation and native grasses planting in detention ponds, which will mitigate drought by reducing the 
urban heat island effect. All investments will have climate-informed engineering designs that account for 
localized climate projections. The proposed AF3 investments will be finalized in consultation with 
communities and stakeholders; and build on preparatory works.17 Final investments will be determined 
based on the proposed funding allocation using a performance-based allocation,18 which incentivizes 
performance and fosters accountability from participating cities. Possible allocation and implementation 
arrangements for stabilization investments19 in Hirshabelle and Galmudug will be provided following the 
proposed analytics described below under Component 2 and detailed in the revised operations manual.  
 
15. 
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Analytics (US$3 million, of which IDA US$3 
million). The allocation will be increased from US$2 million to US$3 million. Additional funds will be used 
for consultative scoping and analytical work procured through the PCU of the MoPWRH to inform 
potential stabilization investments in urban areas in Hirshabelle and Galmudug.20 Analytical work could 
include: (i) a detailed assessment of the security situation, intercommunal dynamics, access constraints, 
 
15 The project is already supporting FRM and completed 55.5km of roadside drains in 4 cities, desilted 4 catchment ponds and 0.7km trunk 
drainage in Mogadishu, and .74km in stand-alone drainage in Kismayo. A total of 40km of trunk drainage are planned for Mogadishu, Kismayo, 
and Garowe. Also completed 19.3km asphalt roads in 4 cities and 3 box culverts in Baidoa. 
16 FRM infrastructure (trunk drainage, roadside drainage, detention ponds) and the bridges will be designed using international standards 
already in use by the project and based on climate change adjusted 25-year return period. 
17 AF3 Readiness: Feasibility and detailed engineering designs for ‘quick wins” will be completed by October 2024 and to complete by end of 
early 2026. In addition, civil work for proposed drainage and larger investments is expected to commence by August 2025, following completion 
of Feasibility Studies (FS) and Detailed Engineering Designs (DED) developed by UNOPS which is expected to be completed by early 2025. 
18 See also Lessons Learned. Each city would receive a nominal budget allocation based on vulnerability and an equal share subject to annual 
allocations informed by performance indicators. The second- and third- allocations will be determined by an independent third party through 
performance assessment.  
19 Any new proposed stabilization investments will be discussed with the World Bank. Possible stabilization investments will be limited to the 
existing typology of activities already funded under the project. 
20 Informed by World Bank-delivered Rapid Social Assessment (January 2024).  
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 41 
 
and climate and disaster risks; (ii) analysis of existing community structures and government institutional 
capacity; (iii) support for government-led community engagement and participatory planning exercises, 
enabling communities to identify and rank their priority needs, while considering options for 
mainstreaming disaster risk management and climate change adaptation and mitigation; (iv) a geospatial 
mapping of urban infrastructure, including information on the status and/or quality of infrastructure and 
preliminary estimates of the scale of investment required for rehabilitation or construction needs; (v) 
estimates of potential beneficiaries of urban infrastructure investments, triangulating satellite imagery 
and field data; and (vi) a survey on household needs in targeted areas (informed by feasibility scoping 
exercise and potentially applying a lighter touch version of the Somali High Frequency Survey and analysis 
to frame needs within a broader national narrative).   
 
16. 
The proposed analytical works will be implemented in accordance with the 2023 FGS Stabilization 
Plan which adopts a whole-of-government approach to stabilization with a narrow focus on early 
recovery.  FGS has instilled a sense of urgency to support delivery of the plan; however, the details of how 
it will be operationalized, notably at sub-national levels, remain unclear. The inclusion of institutions not 
previously engaged in stabilization activities has raised questions about roles and responsibilities. 
Proposed analytical work will be carefully pursued to avoid triggering competition between institutions 
over the prospect of additional resources. It will be coordinated with stabilization partners and key 
government actors to avoid duplication, including the government-led stabilization working group, 
building on existing needs assessments, and learning from how partners such as USAID, UK AID, 
International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the NS Foundation are adapting their operational 
modalities to deliver in these higher-risk contexts. The analytical work may inform possible investments 
supported by World Bank and government programming. This AF3 will initiate an assessment in selected 
liberated areas, while synergies from other World Bank supported operations, i.e., Somalia Horn of Africa 
Infrastructure Integration Project (SHIIP, P173119) is expected for possible future investments. The SHIIP 
project is preparing an investment pipeline of economic corridor projects, which will help strengthen 
linkages between urban areas, including in newly recovered areas. 
 
17. 
Component 3: Project Management and Capacity Building (US$30.5 million, of which IDA US$20 
million). The allocation will be increased from US$28.5 million to US$30.5 million to cover project 
implementation and management costs of scaled-up investments and further capacity building across all 
PIUs and the PCU, e.g., for contract management. This will also enable the PIUs in Beledweyne and 
Dhusamareb to support government-led scoping and analytics to inform potential urban stabilization 
investments in Hirshabelle and Galmudug. 
 
18. 
Component 4: Response to Urban Forced Displacement. No changes.  
 
19. 
Component 5: CERC. No changes.  
 
Table 2. Project Cost by Component and Funding Sources (US$, millions) 
Component 
Parent Project 
First AF 
Second AF 
Third AF 
Total 
1. Urban Infrastructure and Services 
89.0 
19.0 
0.0 
47.0 
155.0 
2. Institutional Strengthening and Analytics 
5.0 
0.0 
-3.021 
1.0 
3.0 
 
21 Allocation for Component 2. Institutional Strengthening and Analytics was reduced from US$5 million to US$2 million under the Second AF, to 
address shortfall of the project management budget to account for the two-year extension of the project closing date under the first AF.  
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 41 
 
Component 
Parent Project 
First AF 
Second AF 
Third AF 
Total 
3. Project Management and Capacity Building 
18.0 
2.5 
8.0 
2.0 
30.5 
4. Response to Urban Forced Displacement 
— 
— 
65.022 
0.0 
65.0 
5. CERC 
0.0 
20.0 
-20.022 
0.0 
0.0 
Total 
112.0 
41.5 
50.0 
50.0 
253.5 
 
D. Intermediate Results Indicators and Beneficiaries 
 
20. 
The immediate beneficiaries of the AF3 are the residents of Baidoa, Beledweyne, Mogadishu, 
Dhusamareb, Garowe, and Kismayo. The number of women, men, and children benefitting from improved 
access to climate resilient urban infrastructure and services is expected to exceed one million throughout 
the life of the project, including AF3. This revised target reflects the results of completed and ongoing civil 
works and a conservative estimate of the expected beneficiaries of the AF3 civil works. Civil works have 
already benefitted at least 400,000 beneficiaries, far exceeding the original target of 30,000 and the 
revised target introduced with the first AF of 45,000. The target was not revised with the second AF, as 
new indicators were introduced to separately track beneficiaries of the response to urban forced 
displacement. Concerted efforts to include IDPs in investments will continue. Municipal staff in the six 
cities will benefit from capacity building. Targets of select intermediate indicators will be adjusted 
upwards to reflect the additional investments and technical assistance. A new indicator is introduced to 
reflect the increased focus on FRM.  
 
21. 
The project has several intermediate indicators which are relevant to the new World Bank 
scorecard indicators, such as: (i) number of women engaged in skilled and unskilled labor activities in the 
project; (ii) number of person days employment created (days, gender, IDP, and host communities); and 
(iii) number of displaced people and people in host communities provided with services and livelihoods.  
 
E. Theory of Change  
 
22. 
There is no change proposed to the SURP-II’s Theory of Change.  
 
F. Cross Cutting Priorities  
 
23. 
Community engagement and Inclusion of Vulnerable Groups. Community engagement will be at 
the core of AF3 interventions with project-affected persons meaningfully consulted during preparation 
and implementation and the application of a participatory planning and decision-making approach. 
Community engagement processes will involve all vulnerable or disadvantaged individuals and groups, 
considering their limited participation in decision-making processes in the Somali context. The project will 
address inequality and exclusion and promote social resilience and cohesion by focusing on investments 
that benefit all segments of the community. 
 
24. 
Stakeholder engagement. Strengthen structure of stakeholder engagement to reflect the 
provisions of the 2012 Provisional Constitution of Somalia, other relevant laws on public participation, 
and ESS10 to ensure constructive relationships are built and maintained with project stakeholders 
throughout implementation. The nature, scope, and frequency of stakeholder engagement will be 
 
22US20 million from the CERC was added to the new component under the AF2, resulting in a component total of US$65 million. 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 41 
 
proportionate to the nature and scale of project activities and potential Environmental and Social (E&S) 
risks and impact. Moreover, stakeholder engagement and information disclosure to project stakeholders 
will utilize communication channels relevant to stakeholder categories, e.g., email, physical/virtual 
meetings, local radio, community meetings in coordination with community leaders, phone calls, and 
social media, using applicable local languages.  
 
25. 
Gender. As was the case under the parent project, the AF3 will continue to address supply- 
and demand-side constraints identified through baseline assessments on women’s employment in 
construction, including gender-inequitable recruitment practices, policies and work environments 
adopted by employers, skills deficits, and limited awareness of employment opportunities among 
potential workers. The AF3 will address these constraints by scaling up activities piloted in earlier AFs to 
support women in obtaining high quality, longer-term employment opportunities in construction. 
Activities to be scaled up include capacity building of employers on provision of relevant policies and 
facilities to increase recruitment and retention of female workers, as well as skills training of women in 
project areas, widespread and early advertisement of skilled and semi-skilled jobs among women’s 
groups, and provision of technical internships (in areas such as soil testing) to women enrolled in technical 
education and engineering colleges. Impact will be measured through an existing intermediate indicator.  
 
26. 
Climate Co-Benefits. The proposed AF3 will have substantial climate change adaptation and 
mitigation Co-Benefits. All urban infrastructure will be designed to be climate-resilient, enhance 
connectivity, and enable communities to recover more rapidly to disruptions caused by climatic 
conditions. In dry seasons, the paved surfaces will reduce the risk of dust vortexes. Since the project 
locations are susceptible to high temperature fluctuations and seasonal flooding due to torrential rainfall, 
improved drainage infrastructure will provide climate change adaptation benefits during the two annual 
rainy seasons. The project promotes greening of detention ponds through tree, grass, and mangrove 
planting to help absorb urban heat, capture carbon, and support drainage. Investments in solar 
streetlights and pedestrian walkways will facilitate low-carbon transportation and help reduce carbon 
emissions. The AF3 will leverage climate risk data including hydrological data. All infrastructure financed 
by the AF3 will be planned, designed, and operated in a way that anticipates and adapts to changing 
climate conditions (including flooding and drought).  
 
G. Implementation Arrangements 
27. 
There is no change in the implementation arrangements. For the new activities on stabilization 
diagnostics, the FGS MoPWRH through the PCU will be responsible for procuring technical assistance and 
leading coordination, whereas the PIUs in Beledweyne and Dhusamereb will support the day-to-day 
supervision and monitoring.  
H. Lessons Learned from the Parent Project  
28. 
Facilitating transparency and accountability through formula-based allocations is essential. 
SURP-II is the first World Bank supported project in Somalia to use an evidence-based formula to 
determine funding allocations across cities, establishing a constructive precedent. The formula informs all 
city allocations, including for the addition of urban areas, which must be endorsed by the Project Steering 
Committee.  
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 41 
 
29. 
Operational efficiencies have been improved through a centralized PCU and decentralized PIUs. 
The PCU under the MPWRH provide coordination support, technical backstopping, and quality control to 
the PIUs, while the municipal PIUs are responsible for day-to-day planning and implementation. The PCU 
has enhanced coordination and efficiencies across activities through joint procurement and streamlined 
reporting. While further strengthening is needed, the arrangement has already improved coordination 
and clarified roles and responsibilities between national and subnational governments.  
30. 
An iterative, phased approach has been critical to the project’s success in building municipal 
capacity to address urban fragility through a comprehensive resilience-based approach. With bilateral 
support through the Somalia MPF, the urban portfolio reflects a phased scaled-up World Bank 
engagement focusing on more transformative climate smart investments.23 This approach has facilitated 
the careful assessment of needs, risks, and institutional capacity of different cities before scaling up 
financing for investments. This principle continues to underscore project implementation, particularly as 
it prioritizes rigorous analytical work to inform potential stabilization-related investments in higher-risk 
recovered areas.  
I. 
Alignment with Higher Level Objectives 
31. 
The AF3 will contribute to High Level Outcome 3 – Greater resilience to climatic and other 
shocks – of the Somalia Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Fiscal Years 2024–2824, specifically 
CPF objective 3.1 to strengthen urban resilience. It will build the resilience of six strategic cities undergoing 
rapid urbanization, notably by improving the capacity of municipal governments, investing in climate-
resilient roads, and assisting IDPs affected by drought, while mitigating social tensions. With analytical 
work related to the stabilization agenda, it will help inform the CPF’s ambition to expand geographically, 
while considering FCV drivers. The AF3 is also aligned with the World Bank’s FCV Strategy (2020-2025) and 
the Somalia Risk and Resilience Assessment (2023), particularly in terms of addressing state-society 
drivers of FCV and informing the geographic expansion of the broader World Bank portfolio. 
Paris Alignment 
32. 
The project is consistent with Somalia’s climate commitments and is aligned with the goals of 
the Paris Climate Change Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation. The AF3 responds directly to 
Somalia climate exposure and vulnerabilities by strengthening urban infrastructure and municipalities. 
Somalia’s Updated National Determined Contribution issued in July 2021 set an ambitious emissions 
reduction target of 30 percent below business-as-usual by 2030 and includes a focus on resilient urban 
infrastructure. Somalia’s National Development Plan, 2020-2024, National Climate Change Policy (2020), 
National Adaptation Plan (2022), and National Water Resource Strategy (2021-2025) all prioritize 
adaptation and low emission sustainable development pathways. The project is informed by the World 
Bank’s Somalia Climate Risk Review (2023). 
33. 
Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. Investments face high risk of exposure to heavy 
precipitation, flooding (river, pluvial, coastal), and sea level rise. To mitigate these risks,  the project 
 
23 The World Bank’s engagement started with the planning phase under the Somalia Urban Investment Planning Project (SUIPP, P150374). This 
was followed by the Somalia Urban Resilience Project Phase I (P163857), where delivery of urban infrastructure using country systems at the 
municipal level was piloted for the first time. The focus was on building municipal government capacity and establishing their legitimacy in the 
eyes of its citizens. Leveraging on the success of the SURP and using the IDA financing that became available since Somalia normalized its 
relations with IDA in 2020, it has been scaled up under SURP-II covering all six FMS except for Somaliland. With a larger budget envelope, SURP-
II investments are focusing on more transformative climate smart investments that facilitate better urban development. 
24 Report No. 187254-SO, Board discussed on February 29, 2024. 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 41 
 
employs: (i) climate-informed hydrologic and hydraulic analysis applied to all urban infrastructure designs, 
(ii) drainage infrastructure to expand runoff and stormwater conveyance including roads with ancillary 
drainage, detention ponds, outfalls, and vegetative buffers, (iii) green infrastructure for localized flow 
management, e.g., bio-retention ponds, mangrove reforestation, and riparian buffers, (iv) transport 
infrastructure to facilitate evacuations including roads, bridges, and pedestrian walkways that align with 
city drainage and disaster response strategies (as available), and (v) capacity building of local authorities 
in urban drainage, FRM and preparedness, including long-term O&M. Analytical work on stabilization will 
draw on climate data and best practices for climate adaptation and mitigation mainstreaming in fragile 
contexts. 
34. 
Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks. Somalia’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are low 
by international standards at 43.62 metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (MTCO2e) for total emissions, 
representing 0.09% of global GHG emissions.25 The proposed urban drainage systems, road upgrades and 
bridges, and solar street lighting, pedestrian walkways, and nature-based solutions are Universally 
Aligned. The AF3 investments are expected to have a low impact on GHG emissions. Some of the proposed 
infrastructure will generate GHG emissions, including road investments that may contribute to some 
increased vehicular traffic. However, these roads are strategically located and essential for facilitating 
multiple travel demands and reliable access to basic services, particularly for informal settlements on the 
periphery of the city, which cannot be served by other modes. These roads will also help facilitate the use 
of pedestrian and public transport that are predominant forms of transport in Somalia,26 with pedestrian 
walkways and solar streetlights supporting green transportation and lower carbon emission. Thus, the 
motorization level is low and transport GHG emissions from the operation would have negligible impacts 
on Somalia’s GHG emissions trajectory. Investments will minimize any emissions increases by prioritizing 
the use of locally available and recycled construction materials. The use of NBS will help offset emissions 
through carbon capture. The project does not prevent a future transition to lower carbon alternatives. 
35. 
The AF3 will support climate-risk informed, sustainable urban growth for Somalia’s cities. The 
project previously financed comprehensive urban drainage studies in three cities that embed climate-
resilient urban drainage into city expansion planning (e.g., trunk drainage and road connectivity master 
plan developed for Mogadishu). However, due to limited financing, the project is supporting priority 
investments incrementally. The proposed priority drainage investments in these cities incorporate 
drainage measures that align with the overall city drainage strategy and complements ongoing project 
investments. Additional studies are planned for the remaining cities (using parent project funds) and will 
further support Somalia’s climate resilient city-wide planning. 
III. KEY RISKS 
 
36. 
Somalia is one of the most difficult FCV environments in the world to operate in, with conflict 
and security, presenting serious challenges to project implementation. The World Bank will continue to 
provide intensive supervision and oversight to the PIUs at the municipal level, and efforts will be made to 
significantly strengthen federal-level implementation oversight, coordination, and supervision capacity 
through the PCU, not least to address issues of security risk management and GBV.  
 
 
25 Climate Watch, available at www.climatewatchdata.org  
26 Abdullahi Ali Mohamed, Lawal Billa, Ramadhansyah Putra Jaya, Challenges of post-conflict urban transportation reconstruction in Mogadishu, 
Somalia, Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, Parts A/B/C, Volume 129, 2023, 103307 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 41 
 
37. 
The overall risk rating for the SURP-II, including for the proposed AF3 is substantial. The 
Government has familiarity with World Bank investment operations requirements, though their capacity 
both in the Federal Government and at FMS-level to manage full-lifecycle project delivery and supervision 
activities remains generally weak. The SURP-II PCU and municipal PIUs are gradually developing critical 
risk management skills through the implementation of the project. The AF3 will utilize the same risk 
mitigation measures as outlined in the PAD of the parent project.  
 
38. 
Political and governance risks are substantial. While the conclusion of the elections marks an 
important milestone in Somalia’s state-building process, resolving long-running tensions between the FGS 
and the FMSs will require dialogue, cooperation, and trust building. Continuous disputes among the 
political elite and insurgent attacks can distract efforts that are needed to achieve the project’s objectives. 
For the parent project, there are governance risks related to political interference in procurement of civil 
works and consultancy firms, and political interference in the recruitment of the PCU/PIU staff. Mitigating 
measures include regular communication on project activities, allocations, and processes with all levels of 
government, including through the Project Steering Committee; strong monitoring system using the 
TPMA; and placement of a probity adviser for some large-scale procurement activities and recruitment of 
project staff.  
 
39. 
The Macroeconomic risk is rated substantial due to the fragile macroeconomic situation, which 
remains highly dependent on financing from external partners to bridge its fiscal gap and the risk of lack 
of counterpart financing for the project. Grant financing will mitigate this risk. 
 
40. 
Technical design of project risk is substantial. Civil works are not likely to be complex. The risk 
however is rated as substantial given these would be contracted and supervised through municipalities. 
Several municipalities would be implementing infrastructure investments for the first time. To mitigate 
the risks, PIUs will be staffed with a Project Engineer to support the technical aspects of works. 
 
41. 
The institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risk is substantial. Capacity and 
authority in Somalia are weak given the history of conflict and mistrust with public institutions. The risk, 
however, is rated substantial given the extent of enhanced supervision and coordination through multiple 
levels of government, including nascent capacities and evolving emergency coordination architecture. The 
project is now several years into implementaƟon and will conƟnue to carry forward relevant measures: 
(a) monthly check-ins with the Project CoordinaƟon Unit (PCU), Project ImplementaƟon Unit (PIU) in each 
parƟcipaƟng city, and the United NaƟons Oﬃce for Project Services (UNOPS) that provides engineering 
supervision to facilitate troubleshooƟng; (b) deployment of a third-party monitoring agent to review civil 
works progress, quality, and environmental and social compliance, among other things; (c) introducƟon 
of the Geo-Enabling IniƟaƟve for Monitoring Services to streamline and visualize informaƟon 
management; (d) deployment of UNOPS for conƟnuous ﬁeld-level supervision; (e) joint technical 
supervision missions in between oﬃcial project ImplementaƟon Support Missions; (f) PCU backstopping 
support to the PIUs; (g) development of community structures, such as operaƟons and maintenance and 
grievance redress commiƩees, to guide and monitor project investments; and (h) establishment of inter-
ministerial commiƩees at federal and state levels to enable informaƟon sharing and strategic decision-
making. 
 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 41 
 
42. 
Fiduciary risks are substantial. The financial management and procurement environment in 
Somalia are challenging and fraud and corruption risks in the project are high given the significant amount 
of civil works being implemented. Although anti-corruption and public-sector regulations are in place, 
problems persist, contributing to low levels of trust in government institutions. Mitigation measures for 
governance issues have been built into the project design with a strict fiduciary control mechanism and 
application of Bank fiduciary rules as well as a focus on social accountability. The project will ensure that 
the PIUs always have dedicated procurement and financial management specialists in place and that the 
PIM includes a well described fiduciary management process. A Monitoring Agent further supports the 
MPF projects on managing fiduciary challenges. Moreover, the World Bank carried out a portfolio wide 
review for Somalia to identify fraud and corruption mitigation measures that can be applied under the 
project.  
 
43. 
Environment and Social risks are high. The environmental and social risk is high due to poor 
employment practices, gender-based violence, and sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment, and low 
trust in the grievance mechanism. Environmental and social and security risks will be miƟgated through 
the operaƟonalizaƟon of security management plans, such as the deployment of addiƟonal police oﬃcers 
to protect investments and personnel; operaƟons and maintenance and grievance redress commiƩees, 
to guide and monitor project investments; and regular consultaƟons with beneﬁciaries in each city. 
Section F below provides additional detail. 
 
44. 
Stakeholder risk is substantial. The current context in Somalia, characterized by the lack of trust 
between key groups in society, and the accompanying high levels of contestation and violence, presents 
a high-risk stakeholder environment for this project. Opposition from stakeholders (civil society, private 
sector organizations, other donors, and other members of the public), or districts that have not been 
chosen for investments under SURP II are possible. This can potentially have a negative impact on the 
achievement of the PDO. The respective municipalities and Project Coordinators will play a key role in 
managing communications with stakeholders. Moreover, the project’s GRM would help manage 
grievances from communities and the private sector. 
 
45. 
Security risk, categorized under ‘Others’, is High. There are areas across all cities that remain in 
conflict which affects access to locations and insecurity for staff and project stakeholders, making project 
implementation and monitoring difficult. Moreover, the security situation may prevent or delay the civil 
works and achievement of project objectives. Such security risks will be carefully managed through close 
coordination with security authorities and local communities, active use of remote monitoring tools, and 
cautious management of project visibility. The World Bank’s supervision and oversight of civil works will 
be supported through a third-party monitoring agent. The project will also coordinate with ongoing 
advisory services on enhanced security risks management across the country portfolio (which include a 
country portfolio level Security Advisory Group [SAG] as well as increased support to PIUs through hiring 
of Somali-based security risk management specialist STCs). It is important to note however that the 
security risks related to terrorism and other armed groups in urban areas cannot be fully mitigated.  
 
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
A. 
Economic Analysis 
 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 41 
 
46. 
An economic analysis was conducted to estimate the updated value of anticipated benefits 
relative to the costs of the project. This analysis focused on the reduction in vehicle operating costs due 
to road and drainage investments, benefits to commuters, and potential increased economic benefits 
expected from additional investments under Component 1. The Net Present Value (NPV) of the 
investments under AF3 is estimated at US$15.3 million at a 15 percent discount rate27 and the Economic 
Rate of Return at 28 percent.28 Valuation estimates for individual investments will be conducted as part 
of each investment’s feasibility study, but the estimates provided here cut across the full range of 
investments proposed under AF3. With these valuation estimates, the analysis clearly demonstrates the 
value of the AF3 additional investments.  
 
B. Technical 
 
47. 
Technical analysis confirms the urgency of scaling up FRM infrastructure in all six cities, 
including improvements to drainage systems and rehabilitation of roads and bridges with side drains. 
Urban flood risk has emerged as one of the most serious threats and highest priorities across SURP-II 
cities. Urban flooding severely damages residential dwellings, especially poorly constructed homes of low-
income and marginalized groups, as well as public and commercial buildings.29 Recurrent inundations 
disrupt circulation and connectivity, limiting access to local employment and livelihoods as well as schools 
and healthcare facilities. As highlighted by recent flooding caused by El Niño, flood damage rehabilitation 
diverts much-needed government expenditure and undermines public investments in urban 
infrastructure. Recurrent flooding has led to growing frustration among those affected and is weakening 
their trust in Government.  
 
48. 
The proposed FRM investments are sensible and technically feasible. They leverage the project’s 
experience implementing similar civil works, which include 55.5km of road drains and 0.74km in stand-
alone drainage. They build on completed and ongoing preparatory activities, such as citywide flood risk 
assessments and pre-feasibility studies of citywide drainage systems (Kismayo, Garowe, Mogadishu), 
existing designs (Kismayo), designs underway (Beledweyne, Dhusamereb), and urban development 
strategies. The project will continue to engage UNOPS, use the project’s allocation formula, and build on 
previous community consultations. Therefore, the appraisal anticipates timely implementation. 
 
49. 
The proposed AF3 will support climate resilient infrastructure that maximizes urban resilience. 
It supports up to 22km of trunk drainage to extend the drainage network already under development, 
contributing to stormwater collection and drainage to the sea for a minimum return period of 1:25. 
Enhancements also include expanding the capacity of runoff collectors/outfalls leading to the sea, 
additional conveyance lines,30 increasing the number of inlet points for improved load handling and 
installing infiltration trenches, adding retention ponds to increase buffering during heavy rainfall, and 
piloting green infrastructure for localized flow management. In addition, the AF3 will finance up to 19km 
of climate-resilient roads and ancillary drainage. The proposed additional bridges and roads will ease 
traffic, help link different city zones, and facilitate evacuations to low flood risk areas. These investments 
 
27 Estimated risk adjusted discount rate. NPVs at other discount rates provided in the relevant annex. 
28 This estimate excludes potential stabilization investments which could amplify return on investment. 
29 According to the “Somalia 2019 Floods Impact and Needs Assessment”, the 2019 floods affected over 20,200 housing units, damage 321km 
of roads and 23 bridges, 64 boreholes and 272 shallow wells, 15 health facilities. 
30 Trunk drainage will exclude secondary lines which together with infiltration trenches will likely be supported through subsequent financing. 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 41 
 
are largely concentrated in congested downtown areas, often adjacent to informal settlements, that are 
highly susceptible to flooding and align with city drainage strategies (as available).  
 
50. 
The project’s cautious approach on both the proposed analytical work on stabilization and 
planning activities is appropriate for the country context. Drawing lessons learned, analytical work will 
carefully assess needs, risks, and institutional capacity of different urban areas before engaging in any 
stabilization investments, particularly considering the dynamic and volatile context of recovery areas. as 
well as other stabilization actors, with a view to inform a portfolio-wide approach to engagement in 
recovered areas. This iterative, consultative, and evidence-based approach is necessary for this high-risk 
operating environment. 
 
C. Financial Management 
 
51. 
The Financial Management (FM) residual risk is assessed as Substantial. The AF3 will rely on the 
FM arrangements of the parent SURP-II, and the fiduciary risks and mitigation measures outlined in the 
parent project continue to apply. This includes challenges of monitoring and supervision of civil works in 
diverse places with security concerns, risk of low quality or substandard outputs due to low capacity, and 
risk of loss or diversion of project funds due to underdeveloped financial systems and insecurity. This will 
be mitigated by engagement of qualified contractors to undertake civil works under the oversight of a 
supervision engineer. The UN partners who have been supporting implementation under the parent 
project will also continue to implement activities in hard-to-reach and insecure locations.  Funds flow 
arrangements used under the parent project will continue to be used under the AF3 with UN advances, 
and direct payment of contractors and consultants based on evidence of work completed. The AF3 will be 
audited as part of the parent project, and the audit report and management letter will be submitted to 
the World Bank within six months after the end of the fiscal year.  
 
D. Procurement 
 
52. 
Procurement residual risk is assessed as Substantial. The AF3 will rely on the procurement 
arrangements of the parent SURP-II, and its procurement risks and mitigation measures continue to apply. 
These includes (a) limited number of competent procurement staff; (b) weak capacity of bidders and 
limited service providers; (c) this being a fragile environment, the market is unstable and sometimes 
suffers from limited interest from international contractors/consultants or high price bids/proposals 
because of country security risk and this sometimes leads to low response to published tenders; (d) the 
market is impacted by fraud and corruption risk (including collusion and outside interference in 
contracting process; (e) inadequate experience in contract management; and (f) the national procurement 
law is not fully operational (oversight institutions not in place, the procurement management unit not 
formalized, and complaint-handling body not in place). These will be mitigated by: (a) always have in place 
a dedicated procurement specialist with relevant qualification and experience acceptable to the World 
Bank as well as ensuring that the PIM includes a well-documented step-by-step procurement 
management process; (b) training of the project implementing agency staff on the World Bank 
Procurement Regulations/Contract Management; (c) creating awareness among the government, private 
sector, and other stakeholders on the key issues regarding integrity in procurement; (d) supporting 
procurement reforms; (e) encouraging international firms to have joint ventures with local firms due to 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 41 
 
insecurity; (f) enhance the oversight and supervision of procurement activities during project 
implementation and (g) involving the probity adviser where appropriate. 
E. Legal Operational Policies 
. . 
 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
No 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 
No 
.
 
F. Environmental and Social 
53. 
The ESS relevant to the third AF remain the same as the parent project and previous AFs (ESS1–
10 except for 7 and 9). The Stakeholder Engagement Framework (SEF) for SURP-II has been updated in 
line with ESS 10. The Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) for the parent project has been 
updated and disclosed on April 4, 2024, to include the material measures and actions that the government 
will implement to address any anticipated Environmental and Social (E&S) risks and impacts, including 
commitments on timing, resources, and responsibilities required to implement specified E&S 
management 
instruments. 
The 
ESCP 
cascades 
to 
all 
implementing 
partners 
and 
contractors/subcontractors and service providers. Similarly, the Environmental and Social Framework 
(ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been revised to reflect interventions 
supported under the proposed AF3, as well as provisions to manage the E&S risks and impacts anticipated 
from the sub-projects. The Recipient consulted beneficiaries from November 28, 2023, to March 3, 2024, 
to update the ESMF, RPF, and LMP. The documents are currently under review by the World Bank and are 
projected to be cleared by the World Bank, disclosed in-country31 on the Ministry’s external website, as 
well as the World Bank by May 15, 2024. These three documents are part of effectiveness conditions for 
this AF3. 
 
54. 
E&S staffing. The six PIUs will have overall responsibility for the E&S due diligence and compliance 
monitoring of the proposed activities under the proposed AF3. All PIUs include well-trained E&S specialists 
and community engagement officers who will be responsible for daily monitoring of E&S compliance and 
provision 
of 
appropriate 
E&S 
training 
for 
implementing 
partners, 
contractors, 
local 
government/community representatives, and others involved in the project implementation. The PCU’s 
roles and responsibilities will include provision of E&S capacity-building support to the PIUs as needed, 
quality assurance of E&S instruments, and spot checks on E&S implementation and monitoring. The PCU 
is staffed with an experienced E&S specialist and a gender-based violence (GBV) specialist to provide such 
support. The PCU is also responsible for compilation of E&S reporting and preparation of the quarterly 
E&S progress report for submission to the World Bank. The E&S capacity at the PCU and PIU levels is 
adequate and continues to successfully steer the implementation of ESCP provisions and overall E&S 
compliance. 
 
 
V. WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS 
 
31 https://mpwr.gov.so/wp-content/uploads/2024/04/DISCUSSED-ESCP-for-SURP-II-Third-AF-P181512-March-14-2024.pdf 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 41 
 
 
55. 
Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by 
a project supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance 
mechanisms or the World Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints 
received are promptly reviewed to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and 
individuals may submit their complaint to the World Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). 
The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, because 
of the World Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, 
which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute 
resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly 
to the attention of World Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity to 
respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s GRS, please visit 
http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s 
Accountability Mechanism, please visit https://accountability.worldbank.org. 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 41 
 
 
 
      
 
VI    SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES 
 
Changed
Not Changed
Implementing Agency
  ✔ 
 
Results Framework
  ✔ 
 
Components and Cost
  ✔ 
 
Loan Closing Date(s)
  ✔ 
 
Project's Development Objectives
  
✔ 
Cancellations Proposed
  
✔ 
Reallocation between Disbursement Categories
  
✔ 
Disbursements Arrangements
  
✔ 
Legal Covenants
  
✔ 
Institutional Arrangements
  
✔ 
Financial Management
  
✔ 
Procurement
  
✔ 
Implementation Schedule
  
✔ 
Other Change(s)
  
✔ 
 
 
VII   DETAILED CHANGE(S) 
 
IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
Implementing Agency Name
Type
Action
Baidoa Municipality/South West State
Subnational/Local 
Government 
No Change
Beledweyne/Hirshabelle
Subnational/Local 
Government 
New
BeletWeyne/Hirshabelle
Subnational/Local 
Government 
Marked for Deletion
Benadir Regional Administration
Subnational/Local 
No Change
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 41
 
Government
Dhusamareb/Galmudug
Subnational/Local 
Government 
New
Dhusamareeb/Galgaduud
Subnational/Local 
Government 
Marked for Deletion
Garowe Municipality/ Puntland
Subnational/Local 
Government 
No Change
Kismayo Municipality/Jubbaland
Subnational/Local 
Government 
No Change
Ministry of Public Works
Line 
Ministry/Ministerial 
Department 
No Change
  
COMPONENTS
Current Component Name
Current Cost 
(US$, millions)
Action
Proposed Component 
Name 
Proposed Cost (US$, 
millions)
Urban Infrastructure and 
Services 
108.00
Revised
Urban Infrastructure 
and Services 
155.00
Institutional Strengthening 
and Analytics 
5.00
Revised
Institutional 
Strengthening and 
Analytics 
3.00
Project Management and 
Capacity Building 
20.50
Revised
Project Management 
and Capacity Building 
30.50
Contingent Emergency 
Response 
20.00
Revised
Contingent Emergency 
Response 
0.00
0.00
New
Response to Urban 
Forced Displacement 
65.00
TOTAL
153.50
253.50
 
LOAN CLOSING DATE(S)
Ln/Cr/Tf
Status
Original Closing
 
Current 
Closing(s)  
 
Proposed 
Closing  
 
Proposed Deadline 
for Withdrawal 
Applications 
IDA-D5310
Effective
31-Dec-2024
31-Dec-2026
31-Dec-2026
30-Apr-2027
IDA-E0520
Effective
31-Dec-2026
31-Dec-2026
31-Dec-2026
30-Apr-2027
IDA-E1490
Effective
31-Dec-2026
31-Dec-2026
31-Dec-2026
30-Apr-2027
TF-B1409
Effective
30-Nov-2023
31-Dec-2024
31-Dec-2026
30-Apr-2027
TF-B1519
Effective
30-Nov-2023
31-Dec-2024
31-Dec-2026
30-Apr-2027
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 41
 
TF-B8532
Effective
31-Dec-2023
31-Dec-2024
31-Dec-2026
30-Apr-2027
    
 Expected Disbursements (in US$) 
 DISBURSTBL
Fiscal Year 
Annual 
Cumulative 
2020 
1,500,000.00 
1,500,000.00 
2021 
3,000,000.00 
4,500,000.00 
2022 
14,000,000.00 
18,500,000.00 
2023 
6,000,000.00 
24,500,000.00 
2024 
48,000,000.00 
72,500,000.00 
2025 
50,000,000.00 
122,500,000.00 
2026 
45,833,333.37 
168,333,333.37 
2027 
33,333,333.30 
201,666,666.67 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT)
Risk Category
Latest ISR Rating
Current Rating
Political and Governance 
 High 
 Substantial 
 
Macroeconomic 
 High 
 Substantial 
 
Sector Strategies and Policies 
 Moderate 
 Moderate 
 
Technical Design of Project or Program 
 Substantial 
 Substantial 
 
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and 
Sustainability 
 High 
 Substantial 
 
Fiduciary 
 High 
 Substantial 
 
Environment and Social 
 High 
 High 
 
Stakeholders 
 High 
 Substantial 
 
Other 
 High 
 High 
 
Overall 
 High 
 Substantial 
 
   
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 41
 
LEGAL COVENANTS2
LEGAL COVENANTS – Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
Sections and Description
 
 OPS LEGAL CONVENANT CHILD NODATA
No information available 
 
Conditions
 
Type
Financing source
Description
Effectiveness
Trust Funds
SMPF Grant Agreement has been executed and all 
conditions precedent to its effectiveness have been 
fulfilled 
 
Type
Financing source
Description
Effectiveness
Trust Funds, 
IBRD/IDA 
The Project Implementation Manual, the ESMF, the RPF 
and the LMP for the Project have been updated in a 
manner and substance satisfactory to the Association 
 
Type
Financing source
Description
Disbursement
Trust Funds, 
IBRD/IDA 
No disbursement under Category (3) (CERC) until: (i) 
Government of Somalia has determined that an eligible 
crisis and emergency has occurred and the Association 
has agreed with that determination; (ii) all environmental 
and social instruments require for the said activities have 
been prepared and disclosure; (iii) the entities in charge 
of coordinating the CERC have adequate staff and 
resources; and (iv) Government of Somalia has adopted 
the CERC Manual in form and substance satisfactory to 
the Association. 
 
 
  
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 41 
 
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING 
 
 
 
      
Results Framework
COUNTRY: Somalia  
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing 
RESULT NO PDO
Project Development Objective(s)
 
To strengthen public service delivery capacity of local governments, increase access to climate-resilient urban infrastructure and services, and to provide immediate and 
effective response to an eligible crisis or emergency in selected areas. 
 
Project Development Objective Indicators by Objectives/ Outcomes
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO
Indicator Name 
PBC
Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
 
To support the construction of key urban infrastructure in targeted cities  
People with improved access to climate-resilient 
urban infrastructure and services (% female, % 
IDPs, % host communities) (Number)  
 
3,500.00 
5,000.00 
1,000,000.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
 
Financed subprojects functioning and delivering 
services one year after completion. (Percentage)   
0.00 
90.00 
90.00 
Municipalities with clean financial project audits 
that continue to remain eligible for the project 
(Number)  
 
0.00 
4.00 
6.00 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 41 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO
Indicator Name 
PBC
Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
 
Number of beneficiaries reached under the 
municipal drought response (% women, IDPs) 
(Number) (Number)  
 
0.00 
 
371,000.00 
 
PDO Table SPACE
 
Intermediate Results Indicators by Components
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO
Indicator Name 
PBC
Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
 
Urban Infrastructure and Services  
Urban roads rehabilitated or upgraded 
(Kilometers)  
 
0.00 
15.00 
90.00 
Pedestrian walkways constructed (Kilometers)  
 
0.00 
5.00 
90.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
 
Number of person days of employment created 
(days, % female, % IDPs, % host) (Number)  
 
0.00 
40,000.00 
400,000.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
 
Number of subprojects with post-construction 
Operations & Maintenance plans (Number)  
 
0.00 
4.00 
6.00 
Number of women engaged in skilled and 
unskilled labor activities in the project 
(disaggregated by skilled and unskilled) (Number) 
 
0.00 
15.00 
300.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 41 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO
Indicator Name 
PBC
Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
 
Percentage of women gaining employment due to 
skills training provided under the project. 
(Percentage)  
 
0.00 
 
15.00 
Percentage of sampled beneficiaries satisfied that 
infrastructure met their needs (number, % female, 
%IDPs) (Percentage)  
 
0.00 
60.00 
80.00 
Percentage of women engaged in the selected 
cities who consider that their needs and priorities 
have been taken into account in final planning 
decisions and design. (Percentage)  
 
0.00 
 
65.00 
Length of trunk drainage improved by the project 
(Kilometers)  
 
3.00 
 
22.40 
Action: This indicator is New  
 
Institutional Strengthening and Analytics  
Number of inter-governmental forum discussions 
held between federal/state/municipal levels 
(Number)  
 
0.00 
2.00 
12.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
 
Number of municipalities with improved O&M 
plans (Number)  
 
0.00 
2.00 
6.00 
Project Management and Capacity Building  
Number of project and municipal staff formally 
trained on core municipal functions (Number)  
 
0.00 
35.00 
120.00 
Participants in consultation activities related to 
project implementation (number, disaggregated 
by percentage of women, IDPs) (Number)  
 
0.00 
150.00 
3,000.00 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 41 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO
Indicator Name 
PBC
Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
 
Percentage of grievances addressed in the 
stipulated timeframe. (Percentage)  
 
0.00 
60.00 
85.00 
Contingent Emergency Response  
Specific Operation Manual developed for crisis 
response (Yes/No)  
 
No 
 
Yes 
Response to Urban Forced Displacement  
Percentage of sampled beneficiaries who are 
satisfied that the municipal drought response 
activities met their needs (number, % female, 
%IDPs) (Percentage) (Percentage)  
 
0.00 
 
70.00 
Number of beneficiaries benefitting from cash 
assistance (number, % women, % IDPs) (Number) 
(Number)  
 
0.00 
 
350,000.00 
Number of individuals treated with health and 
nutrition services (number, % women, % IDPs) 
(Number). (Number)  
 
0.00 
 
178,467.00 
Number of individuals benefitting from WASH 
services and investments (number, % women, % 
IDPs) (Number). (Number)  
 
0.00 
 
330,000.00 
Number of beneficiaries of HLP services (number, 
% women, % IDPs) (Number). (Number)  
 
0.00 
 
341,100.00 
Percentage of women engaged in the selected 
cities who consider that their needs and priorities 
have been taken into account in final planning 
decision and design of the drought response 
(Percentage). (Percentage)  
 
0.00 
 
65.00 
 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 41 
 
IO Table SPACE
  
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators Mapped 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
People with improved access to climate-
resilient urban infrastructure and services 
(% female, % IDPs, % host communities) 
The proportion of 
beneficiaries that are 
female, IDPs or host 
communities will need to 
be measured and 
calculated as a percentage. 
This indicator will be 
disaggregated by city. 
Quarterly 
 
Project 
progress 
reports, 
UNFPA 
population 
figures for 
districts if 
available and 
with support 
from 
municipalities.
 
Guidance on people with 
access: The data on the 
number of people 
provided with access can 
be measured by 
assessing the kilometers 
of roads constructed or 
rehabilitated and 
estimates of the 
population in the project 
area within a 500-meter 
range that will access 
these roads (based on 
population density 
estimates by the 
municipality). 500 
meters is roughly 
equivalent to 5-10 
minutes walking time. 
 
Municipalities, PIU, PCU
 
Financed subprojects functioning and 
delivering services one year after 
completion. 
These are subprojects that 
are still being used by 
communities one year after 
completion and handover 
of the subproject by the 
contractor. Subprojects 
Annual 
 
Quarterly 
project 
reports/Annu
al reports 
 
Review of quarterly 
reports and verification 
of data by the PCU 
 
Municipalities, PIU, PCU
 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 41 
 
affected by natural 
disasters or conflict are not 
considered to calculate this 
indicator. This is a long 
term project and is likely to 
have subsequent phases. 
Those subprojects 
completed in the last year 
of implementation can 
therefore be evaluated in 
the subsequent phase of 
the project. 
Municipalities with clean financial project 
audits that continue to remain eligible for 
the project 
Municipalities that have 
clean audits based on the 
annual project wide 
financial audits. 
Municipalities must also 
not have any ineligible 
expenditures or declared 
mis-procurements which 
would exclude them from 
any additional 
infrastructure financing 
from the project. 
Annual 
 
Annual 
project audits 
 
Review of annual project 
audits 
 
PCU, federal EAFS 
 
Number of beneficiaries reached under 
the municipal drought response (% 
women, IDPs) (Number) 
Number of people that 
have benefitted from the 
CERC activities. The target 
is to ensure that at least 
80% of the beneficiaries 
are IDPs. 
Quarterly 
 
Project 
progress 
report 
 
Project monitoring, 
quarterly progress 
report 
 
PIU 
 
 
ME PDO Table SPACE
 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 41 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators Mapped 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Urban roads rehabilitated or upgraded 
Measures cumulative 
length of all newly 
constructed and/or 
rehabilitated roads in the 4 
municipalities thereby 
improving urban mobility. 
Road-side drains are 
systematically included in 
the road improvements 
and will not be double 
counted under the project.
Quarterly 
 
Project 
quarterly 
progress 
reports, 
Supervision 
engineers 
reports 
 
Review of engineering 
supervision reports and 
contractor reports 
 
PIUs, PCU, Municipality 
 
Pedestrian walkways constructed 
Measures cumulative 
length of all newly 
constructed pedestrian 
walkways in the 4 
municipalities, thereby 
improving mobility of 
pedestrians. 
Quarterly 
 
Quarterly 
reports, 
engineering 
supervision 
reports 
 
Review of engineering 
supervision reports and 
contractors reports 
 
PIU, Municipalities 
 
Number of person days of employment 
created (days, % female, % IDPs, % host) 
These are the number of 
people benefiting from 
short term employment 
opportunities created by 
civil works financed 
through this project. 
Percentage of beneficiaries 
that are female, IDP, host 
communities will need to 
be calculated. The values 
Quarterly 
 
Quarterly 
reports, 
engineering 
supervision 
reports, 
contractors 
reports 
 
Review of engineering 
supervision and 
contractor reports 
 
PIU, Municipality, PCU 
 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 of 41 
 
will be broken down by 
city. 
Number of subprojects with post-
construction Operations & Maintenance 
plans 
Subproject specific 
operations and 
maintenance plans are to 
be prepared for each 
subproject supported by 
SURP II which include 
indicative operating 
budgets and identifies key 
stakeholders responsible 
for maintenance. One plan 
will be prepared for each 
target city. 
Quarterly 
 
Engineering 
supervision 
reports, 
quarterly 
reports 
 
Review of engineering 
supervision reports, 
quarterly reports 
 
PIUs, Municipalities 
 
Number of women engaged in skilled and 
unskilled labor activities in the project 
(disaggregated by skilled and unskilled) 
These are the number of 
women benefiting from 
short term employment 
opportunities created by 
civil works financed 
through this project. 
Quarterly 
 
Project 
quarterly 
progress 
reports, 
Supervision 
engineers 
reports 
 
Site visits, review of 
reports 
 
Municipalities/PIUs/PCU
 
Percentage of women gaining 
employment due to skills training 
provided under the project. 
Percentage of women that 
will be able to find 
employment opportunities 
as a result of the skills 
training provided under the 
project. The target is 
modest given the socio-
cultural barriers that 
impede women's economic 
participation in Somalia. 
Quarterly 
 
Project 
progress 
monitoring 
reports, MIS, 
impact 
evaluation 
reports 
 
Monitoring, impact 
evaluation  
 
PIUs 
 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 of 41 
 
Percentage of sampled beneficiaries 
satisfied that infrastructure met their 
needs (number, % female, %IDPs) 
Beneficiaries are people or 
groups who directly derive 
benefits from improved 
roads in this project and 
their satisfaction with the 
infrastructure will be 
assessed through 
questionnaires in focus 
group discussions. The 
measure of satisfaction will 
need to look at multiple 
dimensions including the 
quality of the rehabilitated 
infrastructure and whether 
the rehabilitated road has 
improved their access to 
services/jobs. Satisfaction 
to be calculated through 
focus group discussions 
and or surveys. 
Mid-term 
and end 
project. 
 
Mid-term and 
end project 
evaluation 
 
Review of evaluation 
reports 
 
PIU/Municipality, PCU 
 
Percentage of women engaged in the 
selected cities who consider that their 
needs and priorities have been taken into 
account in final planning decisions and 
design. 
This indicator measures the 
level of meaningful 
participation of women in 
project implementation 
which measures whether 
they feel that their needs 
and priorities were 
reflected in the final 
decisions. 
Quarterly 
 
Project 
quarterly 
progress 
reports 
 
Project monitoring 
 
PIUs 
 
Length of trunk drainage improved by the 
project 
Captures coverage of trunk 
drainage networks, 
detention ponds, and 
annual 
 
project data 
from each 
participating 
PIU data collection and 
monthly report, project 
MIS, M&E  
PIU in each participating 
city 
 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 of 41 
 
nature-based solutions 
such as mangrove etc. in 
six participating cities 
city
 
Number of inter-governmental forum 
discussions held between 
federal/state/municipal levels 
The number of meetings 
held that involve the 
different layers of the 
government to discuss 
issues related to the 
project, functional 
assignments related to 
service delivery, revenue 
sharing etc. 
Quarterly 
 
Project 
Quarterly 
reports 
 
Review of project 
quarterly reports 
 
PIU, municipality, PCU 
 
Number of municipalities with improved 
O&M plans 
These are O&M plans that 
are informed by the 
number of km of paved 
roads in the city that needs 
to be maintained, the 
institutional structure 
within the municipality that 
would implement the O&M 
plan and the availability of 
financing within the 
municipality. 
Annual 
 
Quarterly 
reports 
 
Review of quarterly 
reports 
 
PIU, Municipality, PCU 
 
Number of project and municipal staff 
formally trained on core municipal 
functions 
The number of municipal 
staff trained in 
procurement, financial 
management, social and 
environment safeguard 
management, project 
management etc. 
Assumption is 20 
persons/city. 
Quarterly 
 
Quarterly 
progress 
reports 
 
Review of quarterly 
progress reports 
 
PIU, PCU and 
Municipalities 
 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 38 of 41 
 
Participants in consultation activities 
related to project implementation 
(number, disaggregated by percentage of 
women, IDPs) 
This indicator measures the 
level of community 
engagement in project 
implementation - this 
includes in the selection of 
subprojects, during 
construction and in the 
selection of beneficiaries 
for casual labor and in 
maintenance activities. 
Assumption is 100 
persons/city. 
Quarterly 
 
Quarterly 
reports, mid-
term and end 
project 
evaluation 
 
Review of quarterly 
reports, focus group 
discussions or surveys in 
midterm/end project 
evaluation 
 
PIU, PCU, Municipalities 
 
Percentage of grievances addressed in the 
stipulated timeframe. 
This indicator measures the 
transparency and 
accountability mechanism 
established by the project. 
Grievances would need to 
be registered and 
responded to within a 
timeframe as stipulated in 
the Project Implementation 
Manual. 
Quarterly 
 
Quarterly 
progress 
reports 
 
Review of quarterly 
progress reports 
 
PIU, PCU, Municipalities 
 
Specific Operation Manual developed for 
crisis response 
An operational manual for 
the CERC will need to be 
developed that outlines the 
eligible activities to be 
financed under this 
component if triggered and 
the implementation 
modalities. 
Annual 
 
Progress 
report 
 
Project monitoring 
 
Municipalities, PCU 
 
Percentage of sampled beneficiaries who 
are satisfied that the municipal drought 
Percentage of sampled 
beneficiaries who are 
Quarterly
 
Progress 
reports 
Project monitoring
 
PIU
 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 39 of 41 
 
response activities met their needs 
(number, % female, %IDPs) (Percentage) 
satisfied that the services 
provided under the CERC 
(WASH, health, Housing, 
Land and Property) met 
their needs. 
Number of beneficiaries benefitting from 
cash assistance (number, % women, % 
IDPs) (Number) 
Number of person-days 
generated by cash-for-work 
initiatives under the CERC. 
80 percent of the 
beneficiaries are expected 
to be IDPs. 
quarterly 
 
project 
progress 
reports 
 
project MIS 
 
PIU 
 
Number of individuals treated with health 
and nutrition services (number, % 
women, % IDPs) (Number). 
Number of individuals 
treated with health and 
nutrition services for the 
drought response 
Quarterly 
 
Progress 
Reports 
 
project MIS 
 
PCU/PIUs/IOM 
 
Number of individuals benefitting from 
WASH services and investments (number, 
% women, % IDPs) (Number). 
Number of individuals 
benefitting from WASH 
services and investments, 
including water distribution 
points, twin latrines, 
boreholes, hygiene kits, 
and water trucking 
Quarterly 
 
progress 
report 
 
project MIS 
 
PCU/PIUs/IOM 
 
Number of beneficiaries of HLP services 
(number, % women, % IDPs) (Number). 
Number of beneficiaries of 
HLP services including 
longer-term support, such 
as legal, housing, and 
relocation services, and 
short-term support 
through the provision of 
shelter kits/tarps. 
Quarterly 
 
progress 
report 
 
project MIS 
 
PCU/PIUs/IOM 
 
Percentage of women engaged in the 
selected cities who consider that their 
Percentage of women 
engaged in the selected 
Quarterly
 
progress 
reports 
project MIS
 
PCU/PIUs/IOM
 
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 40 of 41 
 
needs and priorities have been taken into 
account in final planning decision and 
design of the drought response 
(Percentage). 
cities who consider that 
their needs and priorities 
have been taken into 
account in final planning 
decision and design of the 
drought response 
 
ME IO Table SPACE
 
 
 
 
  
The World Bank
Somalia Urban Resilience Project II Third Additional Financing (P181512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 41 of 41 
 
 
