 
Document of 
The World Bank 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
Report No: PAD5593  
 
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
PROJECT PAPER 
ON A  
PROPOSED SECOND ADDITIONAL GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 49 MILLION 
(US$65 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
 
AND A PROPOSED GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$4 MILLION 
 
FROM THE SOMALIA MULTI-PARTNER FUND 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
 
FOR THE 
SOMALIA RECURRENT COST AND REFORM FINANCING PROJECT - PHASE III 
 
April 9, 2024 
 
 
 
Governance Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
 
 
 
  
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective February 29, 2024) 
 
Currency Unit  =   Somali Shillings 
US$1 = SDR 0.75 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Victoria Kwakwa 
Country Director: Keith E. Hansen 
Regional Director: Hassan Zaman 
Practice Manager: Manuel Vargas 
Task Team Leaders: Alma Nurshaikhova, Jana Kunicova 
  
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
AF 
Additional Financing   
AM 
Accountability Mechanism 
BRA 
Benadir Regional Administration   
CEC 
Community Education Committee  
CoA 
Chart of Accounts   
COAPM 
Comprehensive Operations, Accounting Procedures Manual   
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework  
DA 
Designated Account 
DRM 
Domestic Revenue Mobilization   
E&S 
Environment and Social 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Sections  
ECF 
Extended Credit Facility   
EEP 
Eligible Expenditure Program 
ESMF 
Environment and Social Management Framework 
ESMP 
Environment and Social Management Plan 
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict and Violence 
FGS 
Federal Republic of Somalia   
FHS 
Female Health Supervisors 
FHW 
Female Health Workers   
FM 
Financial Management  
FMFF 
Finance Ministers' Fiscal Forum 
FMS 
Federal Member State    
GBV 
Gender-based Violence   
GHG 
Greenhouse Gas 
GRC 
Grievance Redress Committee 
GM 
Grievance Mechanism 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service   
HEIS 
Hands-on Enhanced Implementation Support 
HIPC 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 
HMIS 
Health Management and Information System 
HRMIS 
Human Resources Management Information System  
HTP  
Health Technical Partner   
ICT 
Information and Communications Technology 
IDA 
International Development Association   
IDP 
Internally Displaced Persons 
IFI 
International Financial Institutions 
IFR 
Interim Financial Report 
IGFF 
Inter-governmental Fiscal Forum   
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
IPF 
Investment Project Financing 
ITAS 
Integrated Tax Administration Automation System  
IP 
Implementation Progress  
 
ISR 
Implementation Status and Results Report  
IVA 
Independent Verification Agent 
 
 
MA 
Monitoring Agent 
MDA 
Ministries, Departments, and Agencies  
MoF 
Ministry of Finance 
MoH 
Ministry of Health 
NCSC 
National Civil Service Commission 
NDCs 
Nationally Determined Contributions 
NDP 
National Development Plan 
NSRC 
Non-Salary Recurrent Costs 
OAG 
Office of the Accountant General  
OAuG 
Office of the Auditor General   
OBI 
Open Budget Index 
PBC 
Performance-Based Condition  
PEC 
Participation Eligibility Criteria 
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
PFM 
Public Finance Management  
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
POM 
Project Operations Manual   
PP 
Procurement Plan   
PPSD 
Project Procurement Strategy for Development   
PREMIS II 
Public Resource Management in Somalia Project – Phase II 
PSM 
Public Sector Management   
RCRF 
Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing 
SEAH 
Sexual Exploitation Abuse and/or Harassment 
SERP 
Somalia Enhancing Public Resource Management Project  
SFMIS 
Somalia Financial Management Information System  
SMPF 
Somalia Multi-Partner Fund  
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement   
TA 
Technical Assistance 
UCoA 
Unified Chart of Accounts   
VA 
Verification Agent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
   
I. 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING ........................................ 8 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING .................................................................... 13 
III. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 18 
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................................. 20 
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICE ....................................................................................... 25 
VI    SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES ..................................................................................... 26 
VII   DETAILED CHANGE(S) .................................................................................................... 26 
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 30 
ANNEX 1. ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIAL STANDARDS ACTION PLAN ....................................... 92 
ANNEX 2. RCRF FINANCING BY SUB-COMPONENTS .............................................................. 93 
 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 94 
 
       
BASIC INFORMATION – PARENT (Somalia Recurrent Cost & Reform Financing Project - Phase 3 - P173731) 
 
 
Country 
Product Line 
Team Leader(s) 
Somalia 
IBRD/IDA 
Alma Nurshaikhova 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Resp CC 
Req CC 
Practice Area (Lead) 
P173731 
Investment Project 
Financing 
EAEG1 (9748) 
AECE2 (6542) 
Governance 
  
Implementing Agency: Federal Member State Galmudug, Federal Member State Southwest, Federal Member State 
Jubaland, Federal Member State Hirshabelle, Ministry of Finance, Federal Government of Somalia, Federal Member 
state Puntland 
 ADD FIN TBL1 
Is this a regionally tagged 
project? 
 
No 
 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
 
No 
 
Approval Date 
Closing Date 
Expected 
Guarantee 
Expiration Date 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
11-Jun-2020 
31-Dec-2025  
Moderate 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Parent 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach [MPA] 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[✓] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 94 
 
Development Objective(s) 
 
To support the Federal Government of Somalia and Eligible Federal Member States to strengthen resource 
management systems, the inter-governmental fiscal framework, and service delivery systems in health and 
education. 
 
Ratings (from Parent ISR) 
 RATING_DRAFT_
NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation 
Latest ISR 
 
26-Apr-2021 
01-Nov-2021 
30-May-2022 
15-Dec-2022 
11-Jul-2023 
09-Jan-2024 
Progress towards 
achievement of 
PDO 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Overall 
Implementation 
Progress (IP) 
MS 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Overall ESS 
Performance 
MS 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
MU 
 
MU 
 
MU 
 
Overall Risk 
H 
 
H 
 
H 
 
H 
 
H 
 
S 
 
Financial 
Management 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Project 
Management 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Procurement 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
MS 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and 
Reform Financing Phase III - P181407) 
 
ADDFIN_TABLE 
Project ID 
Project Name 
Additional Financing Type 
Urgent Need or Capacity 
Constraints 
P181407 
Second Additional 
Financing for Somalia 
Restructuring, Scale Up 
No 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 94 
 
Recurrent Cost and Reform 
Financing Phase III 
Financing instrument 
Product line 
Approval Date 
Investment Project 
Financing 
IBRD/IDA 
30-Apr-2024 
Projected Date of Full 
Disbursement 
Bank/IFC Collaboration   
 
 
30-Apr-2027 
No 
 
 
Is this a regionally tagged project? 
 
No 
 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Child 
 
 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[✓] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
 
 Disbursement Summary (from Parent ISR) 
 
Source of Funds 
Net  
Commitments 
Total Disbursed 
Remaining Balance 
Disbursed 
IBRD 
 
 
 
  
 
 % 
IDA 
 130.00 
  92.86 
  36.32 
    
 
72 % 
Grants 
  15.00 
   5.00 
  10.00 
    
 
33 % 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost 
and Reform Financing Phase III - P181407) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 94 
 
SUMMARY (Total Financing) 
 
Current Financing 
Proposed Additional 
Financing 
Total Proposed 
Financing 
Total Project Cost 
145.00 
69.00 
214.00 
Total Financing 
145.00 
69.00 
214.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
130.00 
65.00 
195.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILSNewFinEnh1- Additional Financing 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
65.00 
          IDA Grant 
65.00 
Non-World Bank Group Financing 
     Trust Funds 
4.00 
          Somalia Multi-Partner Fund 
4.00 
 
   
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
SML Amount 
Guarantee 
Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
0.00 
  65.00 
0.00 
   0.00 
  65.00 
National 
Performance-Based 
Allocations (PBA) 
0.00 
  65.00 
0.00 
   0.00 
  65.00 
Total 
0.00 
65.00 
   0.00 
   0.00 
65.00 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
Does the project require any other Policy waiver(s)? 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 94 
 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
 
ESStandards 
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Not Currently Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Not Currently Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Not Currently Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
ESStandardsNote 
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Governance 
 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Education 
Health, Nutrition & Population 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 94 
 
PROJECT TEAM 
 
Bank Staff 
Name 
Role 
Specialization 
Unit 
Alma Nurshaikhova 
Team Leader (ADM 
Responsible) 
 
EAEG1 
Jana Kunicova 
Team Leader 
 
IDD02 
Francis Akolu Muthuiya 
Procurement Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Procurement 
EAERU 
Stephen Diero Amayo 
Financial Management 
Specialist (ADM Responsible) 
 
EAEG1 
Leonard Mutuku Matheka 
Financial Management 
Specialist 
Financial Management 
EAEG1 
Haroub Ahmed Haroub 
Environmental Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Consultant - Environmental 
Safeguards 
SAEE2 
Jacinta Achote Murunga 
Social Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
 
SAES2 
Abdisalam Ahmed Bahwal 
Team Member 
Health 
HAEH2 
Alyssa Louise Davis 
Team Member 
 
EAEG1 
Bernard O. Olayo 
Team Member 
Health 
HAEH2 
Cem Dener 
Team Member 
 
EAWG2 
Evarist F. Baimu 
Counsel 
 
LEGAM 
George Ferreira Da Silva 
Team Member 
 
WFACS 
Martin M. Serrano 
Counsel 
Legal Counsel 
LEGAM 
Miriam Tabitha Abongo 
Team Member 
 
EAEG1 
Mohamud Yasin Jama 
Team Member 
Governance 
EAEG1 
Nisha Maria Pinho 
Team Member 
 
WFACS 
Ntayi Anfani Bandawa 
Counsel 
 
LEGAM 
Nyabicha Omurwa Onang'o Team Member 
Consultant - Financial 
Management 
EAEG1 
Ousman Abdulahi Ali 
Team Member 
Education 
HAEE2 
Pamela Chebiwott Tuiyott 
Team Member 
Safegurds 
SAWS1 
Pedro Cerdan-Infantes 
Team Member 
Education 
HAEDR 
Rafika Chaouali 
Team Member 
PFM 
EAEG1 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 94 
 
Rita Obioma Itoro-Godfrey 
Team Member 
Operations 
EAEG1 
Ruth Akisa Oriama 
Team Member 
 
EAEG1 
Saad Omer Siddiqui 
Team Member 
 
EAEG2 
Simon Sottsas 
Social Specialist 
 
SAES2 
Soe Nandar Linn 
Team Member 
 
EAEG1 
Stella Ilieva 
Team Member 
 
EAEM1 
Vanessa Sigrid Tilstone 
Social Specialist 
Social Safeguards 
SAES2 
Verena Phipps-Ebeler 
Team Member 
Social Safeguards 
SAES2 
Vikram Menon 
Team Member 
Public Administration 
EAEG1 
Violet Tsindori Amani 
Team Member 
Program Assistant 
AEMSO 
Vishal Ashvin Patel 
Team Member 
 
EAEG1 
 
Extended Team 
Name 
Title 
Organization 
Location 
   
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 94 
 
I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
A. 
Introduction 
1. 
This Project Paper seeks the approval of the Executive Directors to provide a second additional grant in 
the amount of SDR 49 million (US$65 million equivalent) to the Federal Republic of Somalia (FGS) for the 
Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (RCRF III - P173731). The project will also be co-financed 
by a grant provided under the Somalia Multi-Partner Fund (SMPF) in the amount of US$4 million (SMPF Grant 
No.TF0B8760). The additional financing (AF) will be used to scale up support to (i) the reform financing through 
adding new and revising existing performance-based conditions (PBCs); (ii) recurrent cost financing for the 
Federal Member States (FMS) and community health service delivery for additional 12 months; (iii) the 
intergovernmental coordination, local governance, and citizen engagement activities, and (iv) fill the financing 
gap of US$15 million that was originally envisaged to be funded through the SMPF.1   
2. 
In addition, the RCRF III project will be restructured to revise the results framework and extend the 
closing date from December 31, 2025, to December 31, 2026, as requested by the FGS Ministry of Finance letter 
dated August 5, 2023. This will be the second extension of the closing date.  
3. 
The RCRF III project is part of a series of RCRF projects that first became effective in August 2014. The 
first phase of the RCRF (P148428), a one-year project, tested the systems for on-budget recurrent cost financing 
and was fully financed by SMPF. RCRF Phase II (P154875), financed through both International Development 
Association (IDA) and SMPF grants, supported the implementation of Somalia’s Eighth National Development 
Plan (2017–2020) and helped Somalia reach the Heavily Indebted and Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative Decision 
Point in March 2020. RCRF II, closed on June 30, 2022, with a Highly Satisfactory rating as confirmed by the 
Independent Evaluation Group. The RCRF III project, a US$68 million IDA grant (D658-SO), approved by the 
World Bank on June 11, 2020, and subsequent first additional financing (AF1) in the amount of US$62 million 
IDA and US$30 million SMPF approved on July 5, 2022, has a closing date of December 31, 2025. This is the 
second additional financing (AF2) to the phase 3 of the project.  
4. 
The AF2 complies with World Bank procedures. The parent project is currently rated as Moderately 
Satisfactory (MS) for progress toward achievement of the project development objective (PDO) and Satisfactory 
for implementation progress (IP). The legal covenants are met under the parent project,2 and there is 
moderately satisfactory compliance with financial management (FM) arrangements. The World Bank has used 
a third-party monitoring agent (MA) to perform independent verification of the expenditures upon which 
payments are made. The Environment and Social (E&S) performance has been Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU), 
due to the delay in replacing the Senior Social/Gender-Based Violence (GBV) specialist and implementation of 
sexual exploitation, abuse, and/or harassment (SEAH) prevention and response plan, as well as lack of trust and 
functionality of the grievance mechanisms (GM) and deficiencies in reporting.  The project has agreed on an 
action plan to upgrade the rating to at least Moderately Satisfactory as detailed in Annex 1.  
 
1 The first additional financing (AF1) to RCRF III approved on July 5, 2022, was appraised for the total amount of US$92 million, of which 
US$62 million were International Development Association (IDA) financing and US$30 million was expected to be financed by SMPF 
against Category 1 and 2 of eligible expenditures. To date, US$15 million was committed from SMPF, while the gap of US$15 million is 
proposed to be filled through IDA. US$4 million additional SMPF grant will be used to finance Category 3 of eligible expenditures (PBCs) 
and comes on top of the originally appraised amount.    
2 The parent project’s requirement for the FGS to select and engage verification consultant(s) to assist the Office of the Auditor General 
(OAuG) with the preparation of the PBC verification reports is implemented.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 94 
 
 
B. 
Project Status 
5. 
The RCRF III PDO is to support the FGS and eligible Federal Member States (FMS)3 to strengthen resource 
management systems, the inter-governmental fiscal framework, and service delivery systems in health and 
education. The PDO has been rated Moderately Satisfactory from the project inception, and the IP has been 
rated Satisfactory. The parent project is compliant with key loan covenants and financial management reporting 
and audit requirements. All project components are being implemented satisfactorily as described below. 
6. 
Component 1, “Recurrent cost finance to reform resource management systems” (US$41.2 million), has 
continued to enable the predictable presence and strengthening of the state apparatus during the critical 
state-building process. This component provides up to US$19.7 million of input-based or “baseline” financing 
of the FGS civil service wage bill at the sliding scale.4 The share of civil servants’ salaries financed by the 
government increased from 80 percent in 2020 to 84.6 percent in 2023.5 In 2023, ten of 12 months’ payments 
for FGS civil service salaries, or 83 percent, were made on time. In addition to input-based financing, RCRF III 
project provides US$21.5 million through performance-based conditions (PBC) that support a critical reform 
agenda on domestic revenue mobilization (DRM), payroll management, inter-governmental relations, and 
public administration reform. Good progress was made in the review of payment processes, implementation of 
the Unified Chart of Accounts (UCoA), reaching an agreement on the fiscal transfer formula, adoption of the Pay 
and Grading Policy, implementation of the biometrics system, publishing an annual status report on women in 
civil service, and agreeing on the action plan on wage bill management.  
7. 
Out of 18 PBCs in the amount of US$13.5 million due to date, seven PBCs were met and US$5.5 million 
disbursed, while additional seven PBCs (US$5.5 million) are pending verification. Despite original delays in the 
procurement of the Independent Verification Agent (IVA) and subsequent delays in the verification, the 
consultant is now on board and has conducted the first round of verification with the second round due by April 
30, 2024. The four pending PBCs on the pension reform, procurement and the implementation of Integrated 
Tax Administration System (ITAS) and strengthening payment processes for operational expenditures are 
lagging behind, but the reform effort is expected to intensify with the recent launch of the Somalia Enhancing 
Public Resource Management Project (SERP, P177298).    
8. 
Component 2, “Strengthen inter-governmental fiscal relations” (US$27.4 million), contributes to 
improved inter-governmental relations and reaching agreements on fiscal federalism structures and resource 
sharing. Good progress has been made on implementing of the UCoA, which was used to prepare the 2023 
budget. The Finance Minister’s Fiscal Forum (FMFF) adopted the grants fiscal transfer formula in January 2023, 
which includes a performance component. After FMS complete their self-assessment on the performance 
parameters of the formula, the supplementary 2024 budget will be prepared to reflect the inter-governmental 
allocation to the FMS based on the transfer formula. The component also allows the FMS to achieve agreed 
PBCs to access up to a total of US$16.8 million fostering improved governance and service delivery at the FMS 
level.  
 
3 Although not internationally recognized, Somaliland declared independence in 1991, does not participate in the federal system and has 
therefore also not been part of the RCRF series. While the engagement for development work has been different in Somaliland from the 
beginning, it does not exclude the potential inclusion of Somaliland in future RCRF phases. 
4 The sliding scale of FGS civil service financing was introduced by the predecessor RCRF II project, whereby RCRF share of FGS civil service 
wage bill financing through an advance-replenishment model fell from 100 percent in 2015 to 15 percent in 2023. 
5 The 2023 target was 86 percent, while that of 2025 is 90 percent.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 94 
 
9. 
Out of 11 PBCs costed at US$13.2 million that are due to date, six PBCs were achieved and US$9.1 million 
has been disbursed to FMS to finance health and education service delivery at the community level.6 Additional 
two PBCs estimated at US$1 million are pending verification. After a short learning curve, FMS are now familiar 
with the PBC instrument and are committed to reforms implementation and ready to absorb higher number of 
PBCs subject to ensuring the timeliness of the verification and immediate disbursement upon the confirmation 
of results. The exception is the Puntland State of Somalia (PSS), which suspended cooperation with FGS in 
December 2022 and did not partake in the inter-governmental dialogue, the core of the RCRF supported PBC 
reforms.  
10. 
The local governance sub-component initiated an inter-governmental dialogue on building country 
systems for transfers from FMS to district councils. FGS and FMS ministries of finance, interior and reconciliation, 
health and education came together in February 2024 to discuss the institutional framework, regulatory 
requirements, and eligibility criteria for local transfers. The system of FMS transfers to local governments is set 
to be piloted by December 2024 paving the way of bringing local governments financing on to government 
systems.  
11. 
Component 3, “Transfers for core government functions and foundational education and health service 
delivery mechanisms in eligible FMS” (US$77.3 million), scales-up transfers to FMS for increased pro-poor 
budget allocations for service delivery in health and education. The component has continued helping to 
reestablish the state as a provider of basic services, notably building basic education and health services delivery 
through country systems after decades of off-system, off-budget donor financing of services. About 1,300 
female health workers (FHW) are active in all FMS and Benadir Regional Administration (BRA) with a plan to 
expand the number to 3,000 and extend support to newly liberated areas in Galmudug and South-West States 
of Somalia. In the education sector, systems of salary payments to teachers and non-teaching education 
administration staff were established with a total of 4,467 teachers supported with salaries covering a total of 
1,736 schools. School supervision exercises are conducted on a regular basis, establishing a baseline, and 
supporting the development of school improvement plans. The school supervision approach is undergoing 
revisions with the support of the Education for Human Capital Project (P172434), whereby every school is to be 
physically supervised once in three years, a self-assessment methodology developed and to be piloted in 2024, 
and quality assurance framework to be further refined. These changes require reassessment of the project’s 
PDO indicator on school supervision. The component also supports inter-governmental coordination to support 
defining and operationalizing functional assignments in the education and health sectors.    
12. 
Component 4, “Citizen engagement and feedback” (US$4.1 million), supports transparency and citizen 
feedback mechanisms. Building on a significant increase in the last Open Budget Index (OBI) rating, the FGS has 
continued its efforts on increasing the transparency of the budget preparation process, improving oversight, 
and increasing capacity of budget stakeholders. The Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) based 
Citizen Engagement Center reached out to 19,581 unique beneficiaries with feedback collected and acted upon 
since the start of the project. The pilot mass media and behavior campaigns7 focused on budget transparency, 
grievance redress, and health and education behavior change generating over 200,000 views on social media 
with over 1,000 comments.  
13. 
Component 5, “Project management” (US$10.43 million), supports the coordination, administration, 
communication, management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), audit, and dissemination of 
 
6 Puntland State of Somalia achieved PBC on health service delivery, but did not achieve the education service delivery PBCs, due to its 
non-participation in the intergovernmental dialogue in the education sector.  
7 The campaigns entailed talk shows, billboards, animations, social media campaigns, public events, etc. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 94 
 
project activities. It finances dedicated staff to cover project coordination and management, administration, 
M&E, financial management, procurement, social and environmental specialist, and communications.  
 
C. 
Rationale for Additional Financing and Restructuring  
14. 
The FGS has requested this AF2 to both scale up and extend the project by 12 months as well as to fill 
the financing gap of US$15 million. Specifically, the AF2 is requested to help FGS and FMS prepare for a transition 
after reaching HIPC Completion Point and phasing out of the recurrent cost financing.8    
15. 
Recurrent costs in the form of employment compensation continue to constitute almost half of 
Somalia’s growing public expenditures. Domestic revenues grow at a much slower pace than public 
expenditures and are not sufficient to finance the expanding state apparatus. With the support from the World 
Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF) and other development partners, FGS is implementing several reforms 
that will contribute to the fiscal sustainability of the public wage bill. On the revenue side, these include 
automatization of customs and inland revenue, tax policy harmonization efforts, and agreements on the 
revenue sharing arrangements between FGS and FMS. On the expenditure side, the reforms are targeted at 
improving the fiscal sustainability of the growing public sector wage bill including the implementation of a pay 
and grading system, formalization of the non-formal public sector employees and their transition to the pay and 
grading scheme9, and implementation of the pension reform.  
16. 
Implementation of the above reforms will support fiscal sustainability of the wage bill but will require 
additional time and support. Building on the results and lessons learned from the previous phases, the AF2 
approach is to support a gradual transition from an “input-based” to “performance-based” financing to: (i) 
deepen fiscal sustainability reforms; (ii) increase the focus on wage bill sustainability at both the federal and 
sub-national levels; (iii) enhance transparency and accountability of public expenditures; and (iv) transition out 
of recurrent cost financing. The proposed approach reflects an evolution of recurrent cost financing in Somalia, 
and if successful, it will help in a smooth phasing out of recurrent cost support and help Somalia to prepare for 
changes in IDA financing terms.    
17. 
FMS continue to rely on RCRF support for recurrent cost financing, which currently finances 100 percent 
of formalized civil servants in Jubbaland, Galmudug, Hirshabelle, and Southwest States of Somalia. These FMS 
rely heavily on inter-governmental transfers to finance its civil service due to extremely low levels of DRM. 
However, the formalized civil servants’ wage bill comprises between 20 to 40 percent of the overall non-security 
wage bill in these states, and only 15 percent in the Puntland State of Somalia. The increasing levels of the non-
formalized wage bill may indicate that FMS, unlike ten years ago when the first phase of RCRF was launched, 
now have a fiscal space to finance its non-security public sector. At the same time the absence of agreed 
procedures to govern this non-formalized civil service cadre and limited access to information on the financing 
sources is alarming and may pose substantial risks to the fiscal sustainability of the wage bill. Therefore, there 
is an emerging scope for introducing performance-based financing of civil service in FMS with greater focus on 
 
8 Somalia reached the HIPC Completion Point, qualifying for a US$4.5 billion debt relief, by the decision of the IDA Executive Board on 
December 12, 2023, and the IMF Executive Board on December 13, 2023. The RCRF project series has supported several reforms in PFM, 
DRM, and service delivery leading to the HIPC decision and completion points. While at the recent IDA20 Mid Term Review, Somalia 
negotiated to continue accessing grant terms financing for the remainder of IDA20, in a post-HIPC post-IDA20 environment, Somalia will 
need to ramp up its efforts in strengthening its macroeconomic framework to raise domestic revenues, prioritize public expenditures 
that promote growth and reduce poverty, and ensure that debt levels remain sustainable (World Bank 2023) Somalia Systematic Country 
Diagnostic Update FY23, P500140). 
9 There were around 5,500 temporary workers excluding teachers and health workers as of January 2024.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 94 
 
strengthened public finance management (PFM) systems, transparency, and wage bill management for fiscal 
sustainability.    
18. 
The AF2 will contribute to the Somalia Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the FY 2024–2028 
discussed by the World Bank Board on February 29, 2024 (Report No. 187254-SO), and specifically its Cross-
cutting Foundational High-Level Objective “Macroeconomic Stability and Governance Foundations”. RCRF III and 
the AF2 will also incentivize the reforms supported through the Somalia Turnaround Allocation, a series of 
Development Policy Operations, and SERP. The AF2 is also instrumental in helping Somalia sustain the reform 
progress post-HIPC by strengthening core government systems and increasing financing for public services, 
including strengthening DRM, and improving inter-governmental fiscal relations. In this respect it is closely 
aligned with the IMF’s new Extended Credit Facility (ECF) Arrangements approved on December 19, 2023. The 
AF2 will continue to closely coordinate with Somalia Improving Health Services Project - Damal Caafimaad 
(P172031) and Somalia Education for Human Capital Project (P172434) and prepare for gradual phasing-out of 
RCRF-financed service delivery support. 
19. 
Somalia is ranked as the most climate-vulnerable country in the world10 as it faces a wide range of 
climate risks, including acute climate-induced disasters such as droughts and floods, whose frequency and 
severity are likely to increase with climate change.11 Droughts, floods, and heat stress induce vector-born and 
gastrointestinal diseases, damage infrastructure, destroy farmland and livelihoods, disrupt learning in schools, 
and displace thousands of people with particularly severe impacts on rural populations and the poor.12 The most 
recent drought, consisting of five consecutive years of below average rainfall caused by climate change, has 
displaced 2.1 million people since 2021.13 Compounding the crisis have been the October to December 2023 
seasonal rains and floods across Somalia which alone have displaced an additional one million people and 
resulted in suspected cases of cholera heightening the risk of an outbreak.14 8.3 million Somalis were expected 
to face acute food insecurity as of June 2023, including 727,000 facing extreme hunger.15 The AF2 includes 
climate considerations aimed at reducing Somalia’s vulnerabilities to climate-induced threats.16 
20. 
The project is consistent with Somalia’s climate commitments and aligned with the goals of the Paris 
Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation. The project is informed by the World Bank’s Somalia Climate 
Risk Review (2023), which serves as a foundation for Somalia’s Country Climate and Development Report 
(P501734, under preparation) and CPF for FY2024-2028. Somalia's Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) 
include "disaster preparedness and management" and "water resources management and public health" as two 
of the eight priority areas for adaptation. Somalia’s National Development Plan calls for strengthening Somali 
institutions’ capacity for effective environmental governance and disaster management. Somalia’s National 
Adaptation Plan (NAP) (2022) prioritizes adaptation in an integrated and coordinated manner that promotes 
good governance and institution building. The AF2 responds to Somalia's identified climate risks and priorities 
by: (i) strengthening local governance mechanisms for disaster preparedness and management financing; (ii) 
 
10 Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative (ND-GAIN) 
11 World Bank (2023) Somalia Climate Risk Review.  
12 World Bank (2023) Somalia Climate Risk Review. 
13 UNOCHA (2023), The Horn of Africa Drought Situation Appeal (January – December 2023) Available at: 
https://reliefweb.int/report/ethiopia/horn-africa-drought-situation-appeal-january-december-2023 
14 UNOCHA (2023), Somalia Situation Report. Available at: https://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/somalia-situation-report-4-dec-2023 
15 UNOCHA (2023), The Horn of Africa Drought Situation Appeal (January – December 2023) Available at: 
https://reliefweb.int/report/ethiopia/horn-africa-drought-situation-appeal-january-december-2023 
16 For the detailed description of proposed activities, see paragraph 29.   
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 94 
 
supporting an inter-governmental dialogue on environmental taxation; and (iii) improving climate resilience of 
health and education service delivery. 
21. 
The RCRF III project is gender tagged and the AF2 will continue to address gender gaps that exist in 
public sector recruitment, education, and health service delivery. In the FGS, women make up 29 percent of 
the total formalized civil service workforce and 19 percent of the three highest grade levels.17 Among teacher 
cadre, 18 percent of teachers were female in 2023 compared to 33 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa in 2019 (the 
latest available data).18 Low women's representation in high-level decision-making positions and service delivery 
positions is primarily due to inequitable recruitment and promotion practices, social norms and attitudes about 
women's work, and a lack of professional development and networking opportunities for female civil servants.  
 
II. DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
A. 
Key changes  
22. 
The PDO of the project remains unchanged. 
23. 
The AF2 approach is threefold: (i) to support FGS to fully transition from input-based advance 
replenishment model (“baseline” financing) to performance-based financing of the recurrent costs; (ii) to 
introduce performance-based financing of FMS salaries while reducing their baseline financing; and (iii) to 
increase the share of FMS financing. Participation eligibility criteria (PEC)19 will continue to be leveraged for 
incentivizing the transparency of financial reporting. The AF2 will benefit about 11,000 civil servants receiving 
timely salaries; 3,000 FHWs visiting at least 15,000 pregnant women and 45,000 children; and at least 20,000 of 
project beneficiaries (civil servants, FHWs, teachers, service recipients) reached through digital citizen 
engagement systems. Table 1 depicts the shift in the approach.  
Table 1. RCRF financing modes 
 
Original design 
Additional Financing 
 
Baseline 
financing 
(advance):  
Based on PECs 
Performance-
based financing 
(reimbursement): 
Conditional 
on 
PBCs 
Input- 
based IPF 
(procurement) 
Baseline 
financing 
(advance):  
Based 
on 
PECs 
Performance-
based financing 
(reimbursement): 
Conditional 
on 
PBCs 
Input- 
based IPF 
(procurement) 
FGS Salaries 
✓  
✓  
 
 
✓  
 
FMS Salaries 
✓  
 
 
✓  
✓  
 
Service delivery 
✓  
✓  
✓  
✓  
✓  
✓  
Technical Assistance  
 
 
✓  
 
 
✓  
% of financing 
~45% 
~25% 
~30% 
~25% 
~50% 
~25% 
24. 
The AF2 design takes into account the key lessons on performance-based financing under the RCRF 
series. Specifically, PBCs proved to be an effective mechanism for elevating policy dialogue and focus on key 
reforms in FGS and FMS. While there is still a time lag in PBC achievement, there is strong government 
 
17 Somalia National Civil Service Commission (2023), Report on the Status of Women in Senior Leadership Positions. (https://ncsc.org.so/reports) 
18 World Development Indicators (https://data.worldbank.org/) 
19 The Participation Eligibility Criteria (PEC) are a set of measures that both FGS and the FMS must meet to continue benefiting from each 
project subcomponent. PEC were established to promote basic system strengthening, including intergovernmental relations, fiscal 
transparency, and basic payroll and PFM controls. PEC may be revised as part of the RCRF annual and mid-year reviews. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 94 
 
commitment for the reform implementation. Granular PBCs with several intermediate steps between the policy 
adoption and its implementation proved to be an effective approach that sustains the reform momentum. 
Timely and quality achievement of PBCs require intensified implementation support and technical assistance, 
which will be provided through SERP, Bank-executed PFM support, and close collaboration with education and 
health Global Practices. The verification mechanism is established albeit the timeliness is still an issue, which 
will require close attention and reconsideration of the approach, where PBCs are immediately verified upon 
their completion.20 Performance-based health and education sector financing at the subnational level 
strengthens the ownership of government-led service delivery and builds lasting capacity for implementation 
beyond the project duration. The proposed expansion of the eligible expenditure program (EEP) to include 
government-financed teachers and potentially non-formalized wage bill in FMS will increase transparency and 
integrity of the expenditures as they will be monitored by the third-party MA.   
25. 
Key changes by component are summarized in Table 2 followed by the detailed description of changes. 
Table 2. Overview of the RCRFIII AF2 (US$ million) 
 
Key changes 
RCRF III 
Appraised 
amount 
AF2  
Total 
Component 1: Recurrent cost finance to reform resource management systems 
41.2 
16.2 
57.4 
1.1 Financing eligible civil 
service salaries in FGS: Baseline 
Zero financing after January 1, 2026.   
19.7 
0 
19.7 
1.2 Financing eligible civil 
service salaries in FGS: Reform 
benchmarks (PBCs) 
Existing PBCs are revised and new PBCs added to 
support implementation and sustainability of reforms in 
the areas of domestic revenue administration; payment 
and budgeting processes; inter-governmental fiscal 
framework; public administration; wage bill 
management, budget transparency (see PBC Matrix in 
Section VIII) 
21.5 
16.2 
37.7 
Component 2: Strengthen inter-governmental fiscal relations 
27.4 
16.5 
43.9 
2.1 Supporting inter-
governmental forums and 
Secretariat  
Continue financing the intensified inter-governmental 
dialogue on fiscal federalism and functional assignments 
in health and education  
2.8 
2 
4.8 
2.2 Reform benchmarks for 
improved governance and 
service delivery at FMS-level 
(PBCs)  
Existing PBCs are revised and new PBCs added to finance 
FMS civil service salaries, health and education service 
delivery. EEP to include FGS ad FMS non-security payroll 
and teacher incentives.   
16.8 
11.3 
28.1 
2.3 Strengthening resource 
management systems  
Continue financing FMS External Assistance Fiduciary 
Section (EAFS) and social specialist teams  
6.1 
1.2 
7.3 
2.4 Local governance  
Establishment and piloting transfers from FMS to local 
governments and capacity building for local 
governments and communities for participatory 
budgeting 
1.7 
2 
3.7 
Component 3: Transfers for core government functions and foundational education and 
health service delivery mechanisms in eligible FMS 
77.3 
17.0 
94.3 
3.1 Financing core government 
functions  
Introduce a declining scale of input-based financing of 
civil service salaries in FMS. Expand to include financing 
of non-teacher cadre.   
30.6 
4.8 
35.4 
 
20 See Component 5 description on proposed changes to the verification protocol. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 94 
 
 
Key changes 
RCRF III 
Appraised 
amount 
AF2  
Total 
3.2 Financing education service 
delivery  
Scale down of the component as RCRF teachers to be 
integrated into the Government teacher cadre, while 
education service delivery activities to be financed 
though PBC 8. AF will finance key project management 
positions at the FGS MOECHE and school supervision 
activities.  
19.5 
1.0 
20.5 
3.3 Financing health service 
delivery  
Continue financing of FHW incentives and expand FHW 
program to the newly liberated areas, aligning with 
Damal Caafimaad 
27.2 
11.2 
38.4 
Component 4: Citizen engagement and feedback  
4.1 
1.6 
5.7 
4.1 Budget transparency efforts 
Scale-up of activities 
1.2 
0.6 
1.8 
4.2 Support mapping, citizen 
feedback, and corrective 
measures at the local level 
Scale-up of activities 
2.0 
1.0 
3.0 
4.3 Impact evaluation to citizen 
feedback in education and 
health 
As an impact evaluation has not been conducted, initiate 
impact evaluation activity to enable course-correction 
actions before the closing date. 
0.9 
0 
0.9 
Component 5: Project management 
10 
2.6 
12.7 
5.1 FGS project management 
costs  
Continue support on a declining scale  
5.5 
0.9 
6.5 
5.2 FMS project management 
costs  
Continue support on a declining scale 
3.5 
0.9 
4.4 
5.3 Independent verification 
agent (IVA) support for PBCs 
IVA to be contracted through AF 
1.0 
0.8 
1.8 
Total 
 
160 
54 
214 
Financing gap 
 
-15 
 
 
RCRF III AF2 IDA 
 
 
65 
 
RCRF III AF2 SMPF 
 
 
4 
 
Total financing 
 
145 
69 
214 
26. 
Component 1 has financed FGS civil service salaries through baseline financing on a declining scale and 
performance-based financing through PBCs. The AF2 will finance only the performance-based portion of the 
FGS civil service payroll while the government share of the “baseline” FGS civil service salaries financing 
(excluding PBCs) will reach 100 percent starting January 2026. Performance-based financing of FGS civil service 
will comprise around 20 percent of FGS civil service salaries by the end of CY2026. Selected PBCs are revised, 
and new ones added with the following considerations: (i) fiscal sustainability is prioritized across all PBCs; (ii) 
the cost of several PBCs was increased to add more value to the reform and provide greater incentives; (iii) one 
PBC on budget transparency and additional results under original PBC areas were added in 2025-2026 to 
incentivize sustained implementation beyond the adoption of respective policies and regulations; (iv) the target 
timelines for selected reforms were extended while intermediate milestones added to reflect current status, 
realistic timelines and allow for better reform sequencing; (v) four PBC results that were either missed or there 
was no meaningful progress since the start of the project are proposed for deletion and the amounts to be 
reallocated to the new refined PBCs in the same reform area; and (vi) the description and verification protocols 
of existing PBCs refined to reflect the status of reforms implementation, build on lessons, and to align with the 
implementation support under the SERP, which became effective on October 30, 2023.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 94 
 
27. 
Component 2 will scale up the support to the inter-governmental platforms with the objective of 
strengthening fiscal federalism structures and contribute to the operationalization of inter-governmental 
agreements following the intensification of the federalism dialogue at the national level. The component will 
support the Inter-Governmental Education Coordination Forum. Furthermore, additional results under original 
three PBC areas are added to test the viability of performance-based financing of the FMS civil service, teachers 
and FHW payroll and introducing the declining scale of “baseline” financing. The FMS PBCs will need to balance 
the ambition of the reform with its viability to ensure predictable and uninterrupted financing of FMS payroll. 
Therefore, the verification processes will be refined and detailed in the Project Operations Manual (POM), which 
will be an effectiveness condition, to allow for timely and predictable disbursements in January-February each 
year.21 The EEP will be expanded to include FGS and FMS (including Puntland) civil service wage bill, teacher and 
FHW salaries, as well as FMS non-security permanent employees and regular staff who are not civil servants.22 
Inter-governmental transfers from FMS to selected local governments will continue to be piloted with the 
primary goal of strengthening PFM systems and building capacity for participatory and accountable local 
government transfers for service delivery and climate change mitigation and adaptation. A grant manual 
agreement will be signed between FGS and FMS and a service delivery agreement signed between FMS and local 
governments to specify inter alia eligible activities, selection criteria, accountability, reporting, inclusivity, 
community engagement, and E&S requirements. 
28. 
Component 3 will introduce a declining scale for the “baseline” (input-based) recurrent financing for 
FMS with the target of at least 45 percent of FMS civil service salaries financed from FMS own revenue and 
reimbursed through PBCs. Non-salary recurrent costs will continue to be financed from advance replenishment 
to ensure the adherence to the agreed reform roadmap and compliance to the PFM regulations through third-
party monitoring. AF2 will scale up financing to the Marwo Caafimaad (FHW) program with the focus on the 
newly liberated areas in close coordination with the Improving Healthcare Services in Somalia Project (“Damal 
Caafimaad”, P172031). While the target number of FHW remain at 3,000, AF2 will support additional year of 
salaries to FHW as well as additional costs related to the expansion to the newly liberated areas, which lack basic 
infrastructure. Input-based support to education sector is expected to scale down after the RCRF-financed 
teachers have transitioned to Government-financed teacher cadre.   
29. 
Component 4 will have a strengthened focus on citizen engagement, open budget, accountability, 
transparency, and inclusivity. As initial activities laid the foundations for citizen engagement by improving 
transparency and collecting citizen feedback, the new activities will focus on closing the feedback loop, citizen 
participation and trust building, and encouraging government accountability. The AF2 will consolidate around 
successful pilots and incrementally expand them with the above objectives in mind. For the call center, this will 
entail personalization of messaging, integration of social media, promoting open data, and decentralization of 
its activities. For the mass media, behavior change, and feedback campaign, this will entail rolling out the pilot 
to a wider geographic scope with a greater focus on collecting actionable feedback and showing how it is used. 
Finally, on budget transparency, this will entail strengthening and institutionalizing pilot budget hearings held 
by parliament and budget consultations held by the MoF along with publication of feedback received and 
government response. Activities will be closely coordinated with SERP. 
30. 
Component 5 will continue providing support to project management and coordination. The component 
will also extend the services of an IVA or consultants to validate FGS and FMS level PBC achievements. As the 
 
21 See Component 5 description below.  
22 While RCRF finances 100 percent of FMS (except Puntland) non-security formalized civil service payroll, its share of FMS non-security 
wage bill on average comprises 24 percent. In addition to formalized civil service, FMS non-security wage bill includes permanent 
employees/regular staff, contract employees, remuneration to political appointees, wage worker, etc.   
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 94 
 
current IVA contract is about to end, the Project has already initiated the procurement of an individual 
verification consultant as well as the contracting of an IVA TA firm to ensure timely verification of the next round 
of PBCs. The new TORs include flexibility as regards the timeline for the verification cycles moving away from a 
biannual verification cycle to on-demand verification available throughout the year.     
31. 
There are several changes made to the results framework. The methodology of the PDO-level indicator 
on school supervision is revised so that the self-assessment is measured in nominal terms rather than in 
percentage terms in line with a newly approved school supervision plan.  Targets for the selected PDO-level and 
intermediate results indicators are extended to reflect an additional year of implementation. The share of FGS 
civil servants’ salaries financed by the government (baseline salaries excluding performance-based financing) is 
proposed to reach 100 percent by December 2026. Intermediate results indicators linked to PBCs are revised to 
align with the updated and more ambitious PBC results. A more ambitious target for the indicator on citizen 
engagement is set with the number of beneficiaries reached increased from 9,000 to 20,000. The methodology 
and target for the indicator on closing the feedback loop were refined to distinguish between two different 
categories of feedback - grievance mechanisms and service delivery feedback.23 Finally, a health service delivery 
indicator linked to PBC is replaced with the number of pregnant women and children under five visited by FHW 
to align with the World Bank Corporate Scorecard. 
B. 
Crosscutting Activities  
32. 
The project contributes to advancing Somalia’s climate goals. The AF2 will finance salaries of FGS and 
FMS Ministries of Environment and Climate Change prioritizing technical positions that deal with climate 
mitigation and adaptation measures (subcomponents 1.2 – US$0.2 million and subcomponent 3.1 - US$0.1 
million). It will also provide technical assistance (TA) on mechanisms and fiscal transfers at the local governance 
level to enable emergency financing in response to climate-related and other disasters, including TA on 
decentralizing decision-making for a more effective and efficient response and recovery process following 
severe floods and cyclones (subcomponent 2.4 – US$1 million). The project will further finance at least one inter-
governmental fiscal federalism forum a year to enable discussions on financing climate response and introducing 
environmental taxation to de-incentivize activities that lead to deforestation (subcomponent 2.1 – US$0.2 
million).  
33. 
Digital data reporting and self-assessments will replace the need for physical supervision visits, which 
can be interrupted by climate-related disasters, as well as reduce travel time at least by half contributing to 
lower greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (subcomponents 3.2 and 3.3 – US$0.5 million). The AF2 will finance the 
procurement of at least 1,000 solar chargers (costing US$55 each) by FHWs, which should contribute to lower 
GHG emissions. Under subcomponent 3.3 (US$2.3 million), emergency response protocols will be developed 
and put in place for FHWs program operation and FHWs will be trained to provide emergency response including 
through rapid information exchange, support to the most vulnerable communities affected by climate change, 
and prevention and treatment of climate-induced diseases. Increased budget allocations through PBC 7 will, in 
addition, allow the health sector to allocate at least 5 percent as contingency financing for emergency health 
response to climate-induced disasters exacerbated by climate change (subcomponent 2.2 – US$0.24 million).  
 
23 Currently, the baseline for GM feedback is at 76 percent, but it is expected to improve and reach 90 percent by December 2026. SD 
related feedback is based on messages related to implementation support, health, and governance outcomes that are sent to civil 
servants and beneficiaries to gauge their level of satisfaction, their use of government services and to understand if they are adhering to 
recommended behavior change and other outcomes. For these SD related campaigns, the target is to achieve a 50% progress toward 
closing the feedback loop by December 2026 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 94 
 
34. 
The AF2 will promote the inclusion of women in governance structures, service delivery, and citizen 
engagement.  Specifically, the AF2 will: (i) enhance the role of women in leadership positions in civil service 
through a dedicated PBC;24 (ii) enable financing to continue support to 3,000 FHWs during the extended project 
period, in addition to deploying 500 FHWs in newly liberated areas; (iii) continue incentivizing female 
participation in the teacher cadre and their transition onto the government-financed regular teacher payroll; 
and (iv) support gender-sensitive citizen engagement activities, such as outreach to FHW service recipients, 
especially pregnant women and mothers, through the call center and mobilization of women’s groups at the 
community level for interactions on health issues including in the newly liberated areas. As a result of these 
actions, the share of women in the teaching cadre will increase from 14 percent to 20 percent; and the number 
of FHWs providing services on the ground will increase from 1,300 to 3000, including 500 FHWs in newly 
liberated areas. Notably, a PDO-level indicator and two intermediate results indicators are gender-focus, i.e.,  
FHWs selected according to guidelines, trained, and actively providing services; number of total unique 
beneficiaries connected through citizen engagement ICT systems, disaggregated by target beneficiary group, 
including women; share of teachers reporting timely payment of salaries through citizen engagement 
mechanisms, disaggregated by gender, and the share of FHWs complying with the monthly requirements of 
reporting with the prescribed digital tools. Women-only consultations will be necessary in the identification of 
activities on local governance under component 2.4 which will need to be facilitated by female Environmental 
and Social Specialist /GBV focal points or other education/health staff at the FMS level. 
 
III. KEY RISKS 
35. 
The overall risk rating for AF2 is Substantial. The key residual risks and proposed mitigation measures are 
outlined below. 
36. 
Political and governance risks are High. Somalia remains a high-risk environment for institution building 
and development financing. The risk of political instability remains high and could slow or derail reforms over 
the course of the project. Political contestation, ongoing constitutional review process, and the outcomes of the 
ongoing Al-Shabab offensive are further risks. Tensions between the FGS and the Puntland State of Somalia in 
respect to the constitutional process and power sharing arrangements have reached its peak in March 2024 
with the recent constitutional amendments passed by the Parliament and Puntland’s declared withdrawal from 
the federation. Since late 2022, Puntland State of Somalia has not sent its representatives to the inter-
governmental forums, while FGS and the rest of the FMS continued to advance discussions by reaching several 
inter-governmental agreements without Puntland. Puntland’s position may pose a risk to the achievement of 
several inter-governmental PBCs, which at the same time can also be used as a risk mitigation measure. Delays 
in Puntland’s compliance with PEC, have caused and may continue to cause disruptions in FGS transfers to the 
State and delays in teacher and health worker salaries. The principal mitigation measures for these risks include 
substantial consultation with, and engagement of, multiple categories of stakeholders beyond politically 
appointed leaders and establishment of a consultative process in which project management engages on a 
regular basis during preparation and implementation to ensure visibility and generate expectations for the 
project’s outcomes. Support to the Inter-governmental Fiscal Federalism Forum and sectoral inter-
governmental coordination platforms (in health and education) have proved instrumental in reaching 
agreements at technical levels and preparing the ground for high-level policy dialogue.  
 
24 This is covered under PBC 5 which specifies that a target of 21 percent ratio of women in senior leadership positions is achieved. This 
will be complimented by technical assistance provided by SERP. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 94 
 
37. 
The macroeconomic risk is High. The macroeconomic risk remains high due to limited, yet increasing, 
capacity of the government to respond to external shocks on the nascent formal economy. Successive droughts 
and heavy rains have taken a large toll on the country, aggravating the humanitarian challenges. There is no 
fiscal space to allocate domestic resources to respond to shocks. The FGS is in a challenging fiscal situation, and 
in the absence of external support, may run out of resources to pay for core government expenditures, which 
could result in the accumulation of arrears and heightened social tensions. Economic activity is likely to continue 
to be exposed to significant risks related to insecurity in Mogadishu and large parts of Somalia. Supporting 
improvements in domestic revenue administration, strengthened wage bill controls, close alignment with DPO 
and the IMF’s ECF program will help mitigate the risk.  
38. 
Sector strategies and policies risk are Substantial. The project builds on a positive trajectory of reform to 
date, demonstrating government leadership and a trust-based relationship between the government and the 
World Bank. However, there is significant heterogeneity between strategies and policies across the FGS and 
FMSs, and this fragmentation is a potential risk. A key risk mitigation measure is the highly consultative 
processes that will be followed during implementation, as it will be important to maintain a strong dialogue with 
the FGS, FMSs, and donors throughout project implementation. Co-financing by the SMPF grant will further 
reinforce the engagement with key development partners at policy and sectoral level, including through the 
SMPF Consultative Group meetings, coordination, and updates. 
39. 
Technical design of project risk is Substantial. The AF2 proposes to restructure and scale up activities of 
a complex reform agenda across key institutions and governments. Somalia’s administrative and sectoral 
institutions, however, have limited ability to rapidly absorb resources. In addition, the required intra- and inter-
governmental coordination is weak. In this regard, the restructuring and scale-up of project components will 
build on lessons learned from RCRF III and previous phases and will introduce changes to activities and new 
components gradually to ensure government ownership and incremental capacity building tailored to the 
context. Extensive implementation support and TA through SERP will mitigate the complexity of risks.  
40. 
The institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risks are Substantial. Risks related to 
the government’s capacity to implement activities, considering the institutional capacity of the implementing 
agencies, implementation arrangements, and M&E arrangements, are Substantial. The RCRF III project has been 
addressing this by building additional capacity in key ministries, as well as by augmenting existing capacity with 
external support. The AF2 will further enhance these efforts and will continue to strengthen public sector 
systems and invest in education and health activities to support the development of human capital in the long 
term. 
41. 
The fiduciary risk is Substantial. Financial management and procurement capacity challenges exist that 
are likely to affect the project. These include: (i) lack of key financial management and procurement 
competencies and over-reliance on consultants; (ii) nascent internal controls; (iii) weak capacity of bidders and 
limited service providers and the resulting collusion among bidders due to limited competition; (iv) fraud and 
corruption; (v) lack of enforcement of the public regulatory framework. The mitigation measures include 
mainstreaming the project accounting systems and capacity through the EAFS in the Accountant General’s office 
(OAG), payment processing through Somalia Financial Management Information System (SFMIS), annual 
internal audit of project activities, annual external audit through the OAuG and existing third-party monitoring 
arrangements, intensive implementation support, technical assistance through SERP, and capacity building 
training of project teams. On the procurement side, the mitigation measures include (a) ensuring that the PIU 
always has in place a dedicated procurement specialist with relevant qualification and experience acceptable to 
the World Bank as well as ensuring that the POM includes a well-documented step-by-step procurement 
management process; (b) the World Bank training the project staff on the Procurement Regulations; (c) creating 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 94 
 
awareness among the government, private sector, and other stakeholders on the key issues regarding integrity 
in procurement and FM; (d) supporting procurement reforms through SERP; (e) incorporate Hands-On Enhanced 
Implementation Support (HEIS) during project implementation where applicable; (f) encouraging international 
firms to have joint ventures with local firms due to insecurity; and (h) involving the probity adviser, where 
appropriate.     
42. 
Environmental and Social risk is Substantial. While Environmental risk is Moderate, the Social risk is 
Substantial due to the vulnerability of FHWs to poor employment practices, GBV/SEAH, as well as overall 
project-wide low trust in GM. The risk is to be mitigated through training on labor management practices, 
recruitment of a Senior Social Specialist with GBV related skills; management of GBV and SEAH risks in 
recruitment/retention of female workers; development of an SEAH prevention and response action plan; and 
strengthening of the GM with appropriate structures, procedures and channels to enable safe, confidential and 
ethical reporting of GBV/SEAH and other incidents.  
43. 
Other: Security risk is Substantial. Terrorist activity pose a risk to human security, project 
implementation, and project sustainability. Insecurity can create limitations on access to the operating 
environment, which in turn poses additional project risks, creating challenges for project implementation and 
monitoring. FHWs serving in newly liberated areas, Al-Shabab-controlled or nearby areas, are prone to security 
risks in their catchment areas. As part of the risk mitigation approach, a project-level security risk management 
consultant is being recruited to support in the implementation of the security risk management plan. 
 
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
A. Economic and Financial Analysis  
44. 
The AF2 has a strong economic rationale with important direct and indirect benefits. Anticipated 
benefits include strengthened inter-governmental fiscal relations, improvements in education and health 
outcomes, and a strengthened social contract between citizens and the state. Incentives through FGS reform 
benchmarks aim at generating further improvements in DRM, wage bill management, and public administration. 
Benefits are corroborated by empirical evidence from the literature estimating high cost-effectiveness of post-
conflict interventions in areas such as dialogue, institutional reform in core state functions, and redistributive 
policies, all of which are key areas of the AF2.   
45. 
Given the paucity of economic data and the uncertainty in determining costs and benefits, a qualitative 
approach was chosen to conduct the economic analysis for this project. The following table outline the 
economic rationale of the investment and present the anticipated direct and indirect benefits of the different 
project interventions. 
Table 3. Anticipated RCRF III AF2 direct and indirect benefits by intervention component 
Intervention area 
Anticipated Direct Benefits 
Anticipated Indirect Benefits 
Component 1: Recurrent cost finance to reform resource management systems 
FGS level PBCs   
• Reduced FGS civil service wage bill pressures 
• Strengthened payroll processes, such as timely, reliable, and streamlined 
salary payments, input controls, and exceptions handling improvements to 
public finance systems. to strengthen payment processes for operational 
expenditures, domestic revenue systems capacity, and wage bill 
management.  
• Transition of FGS from recurrent cost financing in the post-HIPC scenario 
• Increased legitimacy of state 
institutions 
• Preparation to financing 
under new IDA terms 
• Improved resilience against 
shocks  
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 94 
 
Intervention area 
Anticipated Direct Benefits 
Anticipated Indirect Benefits 
Component 2: Strengthen inter-governmental fiscal relations 
Inter-governmental 
transfers and 
dialogue 
• Improved inter-governmental communication and coordination 
platforms and processes 
• Strengthened inter-governmental fiscal framework 
• Trust-building 
• Increased FMS financial capacities 
• Strengthened political 
settlement 
• Increased confidence in all 
levels of government  
FMS level PBCs 
• Strengthened budget transparency 
• Transparency and fiscal sustainability of wage bill  
• Health and education service delivery at FMS level 
• Fiscal sustainability of wage 
bill 
• Higher trust of development 
partners in FMS PFM systems 
leading to greater funding 
through government systems  
• Increased legitimacy of state 
institutions 
Local governance 
• Platform established for greater intra-FMS dialogue with 
municipal/district governments on functional and fiscal decentralization 
• Strengthened municipal/district governments’ PFM and citizen 
engagement capacities at FMS level 
• Building the systems to enable FMS transfers to local governments and 
bringing service delivery and decision-making closer to communities 
• Building citizen engagement structures for decision-making on budget 
spending at local level 
• Increased citizen trust in local 
governments and the state 
overall 
• Increased legitimacy of state 
institutions 
• More effective service 
delivery at local level, including in 
climate adaptation 
• Improved resilience against 
shocks at the local level 
Component 3: Transfers for core government functions and foundational education and health service delivery mechanisms in eligible 
FMS 
Declining scale of FMS 
civil service salary 
baseline financing 
• Building foundations for the transition from recurrent cost financing in 
FMS 
• Strengthening PFM and payroll accountability  
• Increasing the transparency of FMS wage bill 
• Preparation to financing 
under new IDA terms 
 
Expand FHW coverage 
and technical capacity 
building, including 
contract management 
capacity in the MoHs 
• Increased service delivery capacities  
• Reduced female under-representation in health service delivery 
• Improved management and quality of health services 
• State presence in newly liberated areas 
• Higher human capital 
accumulation, which in turn can 
increase innovation, investment, 
income, and long-term economic 
growth25 
• Strengthened trust in 
government in stabilization 
districts  
Component 4: Citizen engagement and feedback  
Design and use tools 
to advance 
transparency and 
generate citizen 
feedback mechanisms  
• Improved communication between citizen and state, which in turn can 
increase government responsiveness and reduces inefficient spending 
• Increased budget transparency, which forms the foundation for building 
public trust in state institutions 
• Strengthened social contract 
between citizens and state 
• Better understanding of 
communities about public 
spending can increase local 
revenue collection26  
 
25 See World Bank (2019), World Development Report 2018: Learning to Realize Education's Promise; World Bank (2019), World 
Development Report 2019: The Changing Nature of Work.    
26 See Village Community Support Projects (PACVG) (2015); World Bank / Grandvoinnet & Chasara (2019), Engaging Citizens in Countries 
Affected by Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (World Bank). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 94 
 
B. Technical 
46. 
The AF2 design builds on lessons learned from RCRF II and III and on an extensive body of recent 
analytical work conducted in Somalia). Through PBC-based financing, the project design ensures that financing 
is linked to reform progress. Reform incentives are offered in the form of variable levels of financing for the FGS 
civil service wage bill conditional upon achieving the reform benchmarks in the core areas, namely: revenue, 
PFM and payment processes, inter-governmental fiscal relations, public administration, wage bill management, 
budget transparency. The project’s technical design considers the country’s weak capacity and the right balance 
between rapid results, i.e., payment of salaries of non-security staff for the establishment of public services, and 
medium-term objectives to ensure sustainability. An internal control framework to institute controls in 
payments of salaries and non-salary recurrent cost expenditures in the civil service is included in the design. The 
technical features of the project design have been examined by World Bank staff over the course of project 
implementation and are considered sound and robust. This combined approach, which focuses on service 
delivery with strong fiduciary controls, is also important for building trust in Somalia’s institutions with citizens 
and international partners. Third-party monitoring of FGS and FMS civil service payroll, non-salary recurrent 
costs, FHW and teacher salaries will ensure the integrity of transactions. The expanded EEP will include FMS 
non-civil service payroll and will be monitored by the MA, which will allow to identify systemic issues in payroll 
management beyond the RCRF financing. 
47. 
The AF2 is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both adaptation and mitigation. In line with 
the Paris Alignment Method for Investment Project Financing, (i) risks from climate hazards are not likely to 
have a material impact on the project per the application of the World Bank Climate Change and Disaster Risk 
Screening Tool and (ii) the project is not at a material risk of having a negative impact on Somalia’s low-carbon 
development pathways. Therefore, the project is assessed to have low risk on adaptation or mitigation. The 
project is consistent with the adaptation and mitigation discourse in Somalia in the following manner:  
• 
Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. The AF2 faces no material risk from climate hazards. 
Components 1 and 2 face no climate risk. Component 3 entails transfers for education and health service 
delivery, including expansion of the FHW program. Provision of health and education services could be 
interrupted by climate related crisis; however, provision of financing provided by the AF2 is not at risk. 
Finally, outputs related to Component 4, which covers citizen engagement are not at risk as they mostly 
entail communications through digital and traditional media and in-person consultations would only risk 
delay or be shifted online. Despite the already negligible risk, the AF2 employs the following risk 
reduction measures specifically related to service delivery: (i) Digital tools for reporting and assessments 
will be employed to strengthen education and health delivery functions and avert interruptions during 
climate crisis; (ii) Emergency response protocols will be developed and put in place for operation of the 
FHWs operation during times of climate disaster; and (iii) Use of solar chargers by FHWs will allow them 
to be more resilient by maintaining communication and service delivery regardless of climate induced 
power shortages. 
• 
Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks: The activities under the AF2 are expected to have a 
negligible impact on GHG emissions, aligned with Somalia's NDC commitment of a 30 percent 
reduction, and Universally Aligned. The AF2's activities that have potential for emissions include the 
financing of air and land travel to enable inter-governmental discussions and FHW supervision activities. 
However, given the fact that the AF2 is digitizing some aspects of service delivery, it is expected that the 
emissions from the AF2 will have negligible impact on Somalia's GHG emissions trajectory. The AF2’s 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 94 
 
activities are Universally Aligned as they are related to public administration and education and health 
service delivery.27  
C. Financial Management 
48. 
The AF2 will rely on the existing systems and structures already established under the parent project. 
This includes adequate accounting capacity headed by a consultant financial management specialist supported 
by a team from the EAFS within the OAG. Payment processing, recording and reporting will be mainstreamed 
into the country systems through the SFMIS. The PIU will submit quarterly unaudited interim financial reports 
(IFR) in respect of the AF2 activities to the World Bank within 45 days after the end of the quarter. The existing 
internal control arrangements including approval and authorization of payments, adequate segregation of 
functions through the EAFS and regular internal check mechanisms will also apply to the AF2. The internal audit 
function based at the Ministry of Finance will conduct fiduciary review of the project activities (including the 
AF2) at least once every year. Under the parent project, the internal audit function was supported to conduct a 
successful audit of civil service payroll processes in May 2023. The fiduciary risks identified under the parent 
project also apply to the AF2 and the outlined mitigation measures will continue to be implemented. Funds flow 
arrangements will also remain the same with disbursements from the World Bank to the designated account 
(DA) at the Central Bank of Somalia based on submission of withdrawal application and statement of 
expenditures incurred. An initial advance will be made to the DA based on a six-month cash forecast. Payments 
to vendors and service providers will be made from the DA based on relevant supporting documentation and 
evidence of goods supplied or services rendered. Direct payments will also be made to the vendors and service 
providers from the World Bank following submission of requests from the PIU. The AF2 will be audited as part 
of the overall project and the external audit report will be submitted to the World Bank within six months after 
the financial year end. The residual FM risk rating for the project is therefore considered Substantial.  
D. Procurement 
49. 
Procurement for the AF2 will be carried out in accordance with the requirements in the Procurement 
Regulations for Borrowers under Investment Project Financing (IPF): Goods, Works, Non-Consulting Services 
and Consulting Services dated July 1, 2016, and updated September 2023. The Guidelines on Preventing and 
Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants, revised July 1, 
2016; and the provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement. 
50. 
The existing procurement implementation arrangement of the parent project will be maintained and 
strengthened under the AF2. The PIU is already staffed with a Project Coordinator, Procurement Specialist, and 
a National Procurement Specialist among other key staff. The same PIU staff will be responsible for the 
implementation of the procurement activities under AF2. An adequate number of officials dealing with 
procurement in the PIU either directly or indirectly have undergone procurement training with the focus on 
World Bank’s Procurement Regulations/Contract Management. However, some of the PIUs/Stakeholders are 
not yet fully conversant with the World Bank Procurement Regulations/Contract Management and are still 
learning. Under the AF2, support will continue to be provided by the World Bank by conducting trainings aimed 
toward addressing procurement capacity issues for the PIU/technical department/stakeholders. 
 
 
 
27 Joint MDB Methodological Principles for Assessment of Paris Agreement Alignment of New operations (Version 1.0 June 2023) 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 94 
 
E. Legal Operational Policies 
. . 
 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
No 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 
No 
.
 
F. Environmental and Social 
51. 
Environmental risk is moderate: The main environmental issues for the project relate to the handling and 
disposal of medical kits and limiting the spread of communicable diseases through health and education 
provision. The management of medical waste was assessed as satisfactory at the mid-term review stage of the 
parent project conducted in September 2023. The AF2 will allocate funds for FHW training materials to cover 
guidelines for medical waste management plans to reduce environmental and climate impact (subcomponent 
3.3 – US$2.3 million). Other project activities do not pose risks since they relate to technical assistance, capacity 
building, and training. For component 2.4, activities as part of community service provision are to be carried out 
by district governments and will be restricted to soft activities or minor rehabilitation of local government offices 
as specified in the ESMF and in compliance with the environmental and social standards (ESS7) to groups that 
meet the ESS7 criteria. Any infrastructure works beyond minor rehabilitation will be excluded from the project.  
52. 
Social risk is substantial:  FHWs are vulnerable to SEAH and poor employment practices, often operating 
without contracts and subject to dismissal or salary deductions without warning, and with basic protection such 
as maternity leave being ignored. They also report feeling insecure, which is likely to increase as they are 
employed in newly liberated areas which may be hostile to government presence and services. Training on labor 
management practices should be carried out for all managers and female health worker supervisors (FHS). Trust 
and openness in the GM need to be strengthened including appointing and training female focal points for FHWs 
and teachers at community level. This is particularly important as the call center will be devolved and complaints 
will be referred to the E&S specialists at FMS level and forwarded to the Grievance Redress Committee (GRC), 
who have limited training and orientation in GBV and are mainly male.  For the new component 2.4 robust criteria 
and documented evidence-based selection of districts and sites for investments will be required. These 
investments would be limited to minor rehabilitations only, to reduce the risk of land acquisition or displacement 
and labor influx which could further exacerbate the SEAH risks. 
53. 
GBV/SEAH risks is Substantial: GBV including SEAH in Somalia remains a serious concern both as a 
contextual and project related challenge. The risks associated with the project are linked to abuse of power, 
including sexual exploitation and abuse in hiring, employment and retention practices in the public sector 
recruitment processes which can distort power relations, leading to opportunities for abuse, limitations on the 
mobility of FHWs travelling long distances to reach communities, particularly those in newly liberated areas, al-
Shabaab controlled or nearby areas. Female project workers may also be at risk of sexual harassment by 
colleagues or supervisors, and women may be vulnerable to SEA from project workers. While project related GBV 
incidents have been reported under the parent project, survivors received timely and appropriate support. The 
AF2 will continue to adopt a robust and comprehensive approach to address potential project induced GBV/SEAH 
risks. Relevant mitigation measures to address these risks under implementation include integrating Codes of 
Conduct with GBV/SEAH-related protections; community consultations and sensitization activities to raise 
awareness of potential risks; Senior Social Specialist with GBV related skills to guide the project while 
continuously identifying potential risks and mitigation measures to be adopted; management of GBV and SEAH 
risks in recruitment/retention of female workers; mapping and collaboration with potential service providers in 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 94 
 
project areas especially in the newly liberated areas; development of an SEAH prevention and response action 
plan; and strengthening of the GM with appropriate structures, procedures and channels to enable safe, 
confidential and ethical reporting of GBV/SEAH incidents. The parent project and the proposed AF2 will continue 
to provide capacity building and training of relevant stakeholders, including contractors and project workers, in 
addition to capacity building for government partners. 
V. 
GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICE 
54. 
Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project 
supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the 
Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in 
order to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their 
complaint to the Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection 
Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its 
policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with 
the opportunity to address complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at 
any time after concerns have been brought directly to the attention of Bank Management and after Management 
has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s GRS, 
please visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s 
Accountability Mechanism, please visit https://accountability.worldbank.org. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 94 
 
 
 
     
 
VI    SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES 
 
 
Changed 
Not Changed 
Results Framework 
  ✔ 
   
Components and Cost 
  ✔ 
   
Loan Closing Date(s) 
  ✔ 
   
Implementing Agency 
     
✔ 
Project's Development Objectives 
     
✔ 
Cancellations Proposed 
     
✔ 
Reallocation between Disbursement Categories 
     
✔ 
Disbursements Arrangements 
     
✔ 
Legal Covenants 
     
✔ 
Institutional Arrangements 
     
✔ 
Financial Management 
     
✔ 
Procurement 
     
✔ 
Other Change(s) 
     
✔ 
 
 
VII   DETAILED CHANGE(S) 
   
COMPONENTS 
Current Component Name 
Current Cost 
(US$, millions) 
Action 
Proposed Component 
Name 
Proposed Cost (US$, 
millions) 
Component 1: Recurrent 
cost finance to reform 
resource management 
systems 
41.20 Revised 
Component 1: 
Recurrent cost finance 
to reform resource 
management systems 
57.40 
Component 2: Strengthen 
inter-governmental fiscal 
relations 
27.40 Revised 
Component 2: 
Strengthen inter-
governmental fiscal 
relations 
43.90 
Component 3: Transfers for 
core government functions 
77.30 Revised 
Component 3: Transfers 
for core government 
94.30 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 94 
 
and foundational education 
health service delivery 
mechanisms in eligible 
Federal Member States 
(FMS) 
functions and 
foundational education 
health service delivery 
mechanisms in eligible 
Federal Member States 
(FMS) 
Component 4: Citizen 
Engagement and Feedback 
4.10 Revised 
Component 4: Citizen 
Engagement and 
Feedback 
5.70 
Component 5: Project 
Management 
10.00 Revised 
Component 5: Project 
Management 
12.70 
TOTAL 
 160.00  
 
 214.00 
 
 
LOAN CLOSING DATE(S) 
Ln/Cr/Tf 
Status 
Original Closing 
 
Current 
Closing(s)  
 
Proposed  
Closing  
 
Proposed Deadline 
for Withdrawal 
Applications 
IDA-D6580 
Effective 
31-Dec-2023 
31-Dec-2025 
31-Dec-2025 
30-Apr-2026 
IDA-E1020 
Effective 
31-Dec-2025 
31-Dec-2025 
31-Dec-2026 
30-Apr-2027 
TF-B8760 
Effective 
31-Dec-2023 
31-Dec-2025 
31-Dec-2026 
30-Apr-2027 
     
 Expected Disbursements (in US$) 
 DISBURSTBL 
Fiscal Year 
Annual 
Cumulative 
2020 
0.00 
0.00 
2021 
0.00 
0.00 
2022 
35,000,000.00 
35,000,000.00 
2023 
45,000,000.00 
80,000,000.00 
2024 
47,000,000.00 
127,000,000.00 
2025 
42,000,000.00 
169,000,000.00 
2026 
40,000,000.00 
209,000,000.00 
2027 
5,000,000.00 
214,000,000.00 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 94 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
Risk Category 
Latest ISR Rating 
Current Rating 
 
Political and Governance 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
Macroeconomic 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and 
Sustainability 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Fiduciary 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Environment and Social 
⚫ Moderate 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Stakeholders 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Moderate 
 
Other 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Overall 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
   LEGAL COVENANTS2 
LEGAL COVENANTS – Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Phase III 
(P181407) 
Sections and Description 
 
 
The Recipient shall vest the responsibility for verifying the achievement of PBCs in the OAuG and to that end, select 
and engage, not later than two months after the Effective Date, an independent third-party consultant(s) (the 
“Verification Consultant(s)”, with qualifications, experience and terms of reference satisfactory to the Association, 
to assist the OAuG with the verification process. 
 
 
 
Conditions 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
(a) 
the Recipient has updated and adopted the Project 
Operations Manual, in form and substance satisfactory to 
the Association 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
(b) 
the Recipient has: (i) updated and adopted the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework, Labor 
Management Procedures, and Sexual Exploitation and 
Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) Prevention and 
Response Action Plan, in form and substance 
satisfactoryto the Association, and (ii) appointed a 
security risk management consultant, with qualifications, 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 94 
 
experience and under terms of reference satisfactory to 
the Association 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
(c) 
the Recipient has prepared the Project Grievance 
Mechanism Report for the period January 2023 to 
January 2024, in form and substance satisfactory to the 
Association 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Disbursement 
Trust Funds, 
IBRD/IDA 
No withdrawal shall be made under Category 3 until and 
unless the Recipient has (i)  
submitted to the 
Association the applicable IUFR detailing the expenditures 
incurred under the Project up to the date of the 
applicable withdrawal application, all pursuant to the 
Disbursement and Financial Information Letter 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Disbursement 
Trust Funds, 
IBRD/IDA 
No withdrawal shall be made under Category 3 until and 
unless the Recipient has (ii) furnished the respective 
Verification Report, in accordance with the Verification 
Protocol and in a manner and substance acceptable to 
the Association, confirming the Recipient’sand/or the 
FMS’/BRA’s satisfactory achievement of the respective 
PBCs as set forth in Schedule 3 to this Agreement 
 
 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Nov 20, 2023 
Page 30 of 94 
 
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING 
 
 
     
 
Results Framework 
COUNTRY: Somalia  
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Phase III 
RESULT NO PDO 
Project Development Objective(s) 
 
To support the Federal Government of Somalia and Eligible Federal Member States to strengthen resource management systems, the inter-governmental fiscal framework, 
and service delivery systems in health and education. 
 
Project Development Objective Indicators by Objectives/ Outcomes 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
Recurrent cost finance to reform resource management systems  
Share of civil servants' 
salaries financed by 
government (Percentage)  
80.00 
82.50 
85.00 
86.00 
87.50 
90.00 
100.00 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
The target is increased from 90 to 100 
Eligible civil servants 
salaries paid on time 
(Percentage)  
67.00 
71.50 
76.00 
80.50 
83.00 
85.00 
85.00 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
The 2026 target added 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 94 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
Strengthen inter-governmental fiscal relations  
Number of FMS signing 
Service Delivery Transfer 
Agreements with FGS 
(Number)  
0.00 
2.00 
3.00 
5.00 
5.00 
5.00 
5.00 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
The 2026 target added, methodology changed for 2025 and 2026 to reflect changes in PBC 7 and 8, which do not require the signing of service delivery 
agreements in 2025 and 2026 
Transfers for core Govt functions and foundational education and health service delivery mechanisms  
Female Health Workers 
selected according to 
guidelines, trained, and 
actively providing services 
(Number)  
354.00 
900.00 
1,000.00 
2,000.00 
3,000.00 
3,000.00 
3,000.00 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
The target for 2026 remains 3,000 
Number of schools that are 
supervised using digital 
tools, including self-
assessment (Number)  
1,554.00 
1,500.00 
1,500.00 
1,700.00 
2,000.00 
2,000.00 
2,000.00 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
The description and the methodology of the indicator changes to removed the "annual" requirement reflecting the approach that every school is supervised only 
once in three years 
Number of schools that 
are self-assessed 
(cumulative) (Number)  
0.00 
0.00 
10.00 
30.00 
80.00 
200.00 
320.00 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 94 
 
 
PDO Table SPACE 
 
Intermediate Results Indicators by Components 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
Recurrent cost finance to reform resource management systems  
Strengthen payment 
process for operational 
expenditures and payroll 
(Text)  
PBC 
2, 2 
Payment process 
involves parallel 
manual and electronic 
steps, multiple 
approval steps are 
required, new PFM law 
not yet reflected in 
business processes. 
-- 
MoF has: (i) 
completed a business 
process review for 
FGS’ payment; and 
(ii) prepared/issued a 
business process 
review report. 
Comprehensive 
procedures aligned 
with the business 
process review, 
approved for 
following areas: (i) 
Planning and 
Budgeting; (ii) 
Internal controls; (iii) 
Accounting 
Procedures.  
MoF internal audit 
department has 
conducted a special 
audit on the payroll 
processes and 
provided clear 
recommendations to 
strengthen the 
payroll weaknesses. 
At least 65 percent of 
identified audit 
recommendations on 
payroll management 
are addressed with 
evidence provided 
The MoF has 
developed and action 
plan on the 
implementation of 
updated 
comprehensive 
procedures. 
The MoF has 
implemented the 
approved 
comprehensive 
procedures and issued 
an implementation 
status report. At least 
65 percent of 
identified audit 
recommendations on 
payroll management 
are addressed with 
evidence provided 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
The target is revised to reflect changes and new results under PBC 2 
Strengthen domestic 
revenue administration 
(Text)  
Poor systems capacity: 
organizational, 
technology, HR and 
-- 
MoF has developed 
and operationalized 
the new SOMCAS 
FGS has procured the 
services of a ‘third 
party’ to develop and 
Harmonized tax 
identification number 
(TIN) structure 
FGS and selected 
FMS implemented 
the harmonized 
SOMCAS and ITAS 
implemented in FGS 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 94 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
workflows to support 
effective and efficient 
customs management. 
system in Mogadishu 
Airport and Seaport. 
SOMCAS manuals of 
procedures adopted. 
A simplified 
functional review of 
FGS customs to 
better allocate 
human resources in 
customs is 
completed. 
implement ITAS 
implemented 
between FGS and 
FMS 
Income Tax 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
The target is revised to reflect changes and new results under PBC 1 
Strengthen inter-governmental fiscal relations  
Consolidated fiscal reports 
published online by FGS 
Ministry of Finance 
(Number)  
0.00 
1.00 
2.00 
4.00 
12.00 
12.00 
12.00 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
2026 target added 
Strengthen inter-
governmental fiscal policy 
framework (Text)  
PBC 
3, 3 
While Inter-
Governmental Fiscal 
Transfer Policy Paper 
has been agreed, it still 
requires 
operationalization. 
Current approach to 
distribution of funds 
between FGS and 
-- 
A formula on FGS 
fiscal transfers to 
FMS/BRA is inter-
governmentally 
agreed 
FGS’ FY 2023 budget 
provides for 
appropriations for 
FGS’ fiscal transfers 
to FMS/BRA as per an 
inter-governmentally 
agreed formula. 
FGS’ FY 2024 budget 
provides for 
appropriations for 
FGS’ fiscal transfers 
to FMS/BRA as per an 
inter-governmentally 
agreed formula. 
FGS’ budget provides 
for appropriations for 
FGS’ fiscal transfers 
to FMS/BRA as per an 
inter-governmentally 
agreed formula. 
FGS’ budget provides 
for appropriations for 
FGS’ fiscal transfers to 
FMS/BRA as per an 
inter-governmentally 
agreed formula. 
FMFF adopts a 
framework for the 
operationalization of 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 94 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
FMS/Benadir Regional 
Administration (BRA) is 
inequitable. 
the NCC agreement on 
revenue assignment 
and expenditure 
responsibilities 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
The target is revised to reflect changes and new results under PBC 3 
Strengthen FGS transfers to 
FMS (Text)  
PBC 
4, 4 
Selected FMS have 
minimal sources of 
revenue, and 
therefore difficulty in 
sustaining their 
operations, while FGS 
collects tax and 
customs, partly from 
goods and services 
that are destined for 
delivery in FMS. FGS 
transfers to FMS have 
been made on an ad 
hoc basis. 
FGS’s fiscal transfers 
execution rate for the 
previous FY to 
FMS/BRA is equal to, 
or greater than, the 
out turn rate for 
FGS’s domestic 
revenues. 
FGS’s fiscal transfers 
execution rate for the 
previous FY to 
FMS/BRA is equal to, 
or greater than, the 
out turn rate for 
FGS’s domestic 
revenues. 
FGS’s fiscal transfers 
execution rate for the 
previous FY to 
FMS/BRA is equal to, 
or greater than, the 
out turn rate for 
FGS’s domestic 
revenues. 
FGS’s fiscal transfers 
execution rate for the 
previous FY to 
FMS/BRA is equal to, 
or greater than, the 
out turn rate for 
FGS’s domestic 
revenues. 
FGS’s fiscal transfers 
execution rate for the 
previous FY to 
FMS/BRA is equal to, 
or greater than, the 
out turn rate for 
FGS’s domestic 
revenues. 
FGS’s fiscal transfers 
execution rate for the 
previous FY to 
FMS/BRA is equal to, 
or greater than, the 
out turn rate for FGS’s 
domestic revenues. 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
2026 target added 
Transfers for core govt functions and foundational education and health service delivery mechanism  
Number of women and 
children visited by Female 
Health Workers (Text)  
PBC 7 0.00 
2,000 pregnant 
women, 10,000 
children 
5,000 pregnant 
women, 25,000 
children 
7,000 pregnant 
women, 30,000 
children 
10,000 pregnant 
women; 35,000 
children 
13,000 pregnant 
women; 40,000 
children 
15,000 pregnant 
women; 45,000 
children 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
The indicator is revised to align with the new World Bank corporate scorecard 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 of 94 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
Community health service 
delivery plan funds 
executed in a timely 
manner, in line with Service 
Delivery Agreement 
(Percentage)  
0.00 
22.50 
45.00 
67.50 
80.00 
85.00 
90.00 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
2026 target is increased to 90% 
The share of FHWs 
complying with the monthly 
requirements of reporting 
with the prescribed digital 
tools (Percentage)  
0.00 
0.00 
20.00 
40.00 
60.00 
70.00 
75.00 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
The 2026 target added 
Strengthen education 
service delivery (Text)  
PBC 
8, 8 
Limited tools to enable 
government to 
improved educational 
quality at school level. 
Limited funds available 
to support service 
delivery at school 
level. 
-- 
Each FMS has: (i) 
signed functional 
assignment 
agreements with FGS, 
and (ii) approved 
aggregate FY 2022 
budgetary 
appropriations for 
MoEs equal to the 
aggregated Allocated 
Amounts for PBC #8.1 
Each FMS has: (i) 
signed functional 
assignment 
agreements with FGS, 
and (ii) approved 
aggregate FY 2023 
budgetary 
appropriations for 
MoEs equal to the 
aggregated Allocated 
Amounts for PBCs 
#8.2 and # 8.3.  
Each FMS included 
Each FMS has: (i) 
signed functional 
assignment 
agreements with FGS, 
and (iii) approved 
aggregate FY 2024 
budgetary 
appropriations for 
MoEs equal to the 
aggregated Allocated 
Amounts for PBCs 
#8.4; 8.5. 
Each FMS has 
Each FMS (i) adopts 
the national school 
financing policy and 
operational 
guidelines and 
submits an action 
plan on its 
implementation; (ii) 
submits a costed plan 
for education service 
delivery, and (iii) 
approves aggregate 
FY 2025 budgetary 
Each FMS (i) adopts 
the national student 
learning assessment 
strategy and 
framework and 
submits the action plan 
on its implementation; 
(ii) submits a report on 
the implementation of 
the national school 
financing policy at the 
FMS level; and (iii) 
approves aggregate FY 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 of 94 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
information in their 
financial reports on 
the use of federal 
(service) transfers 
covering FY 2022 and 
the 1st half of FY 
2023 in line with 
provisions of Service 
Delivery Transfer 
Agreements. 
included information 
in their financial 
reports on the use of 
federal (service) 
transfers covering FY 
2023 and the 1st half 
of FY 2024 in line 
with provisions of 
Service Delivery 
Transfer Agreements. 
appropriations for 
MoEs equal to the 
aggregated Allocated 
Amounts for PBCs 
8.8. 
2026 budgetary 
appropriations for 
MoEs equal to the 
aggregated Allocated 
Amounts for PBCs 
8.10. 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
The target is revised to reflect changes and new results under PBC 8 
Share of teachers reporting 
timely payment of salaries 
through citizen engagement 
mechanisms, disaggregated 
by gender (Percentage)  
0.00 
0.00 
30.00 
50.00 
60.00 
65.00 
70.00 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
The 2026 target added 
Share of female teachers 
reporting timely 
payment of salaries 
through citizen 
engagement 
mechanisms 
(Percentage)  
0.00 
0.00 
30.00 
50.00 
60.00 
65.00 
70.00 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 of 94 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
Action: This indicator 
has been Revised  
Rationale:  
The 2026 target added 
Citizen Engagement and Feedback  
Improved budget 
transparency through public 
participation in budget 
process (Text)  
2019 rating on budget 
transparency under 
OBS (8 in 2018) and 
public participation (2 
in 2018) 
Disclosure of 6 of the 
8 main budget 
documents 
5 rating points on 
budget transparency 
and 4 additional 
points on public 
participation 
Disclosure of 8 main 
budget documents 
10 additional points 
on budget 
transparency and 6 
additional points on 
public participation 
MoF holds their own 
public hearings for 
draft appropriations 
act; Disclosure of 8 
main budget 
documents 
Improved rating under 
OBS on budget 
transparency and 
public participation to 
18 and 6 points 
respectively 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
The 2026 target added 
Number of total 
beneficiaries connected 
through citizen engagement 
ICT systems, disaggregated 
by target beneficiary group 
(Text)  
0.00 
1,000.00 
3,000.00 
5,000.00 
9,000.00 
15,000.00 
20,000.00 
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
The target increased from 9,000 to 20,000 
Percentage of people who 
shared feedback through 
citizen engagement ICT 
systems and were 
responded to with 
corrective actions taken by 
government, disaggregated 
by target beneficiary group 
0.00 
0.00 
0.80 
80% for GM; 15% for 
service delivery 
feedback 
90% for GM; 30% for 
service delivery 
feedback 
95% for GM; 40% for 
service delivery 
feedback 
95% for GM; 50% for 
service delivery 
feedback 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 38 of 94 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC Baseline 
Intermediate Targets 
End Target 
 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
(Text)  
Action: This indicator has 
been Revised  
Rationale:  
The target values are clarified to differentiate between grievance mechanism and service delivery related feedback 
 
IO Table SPACE 
  
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators Mapped 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Share of civil servants' salaries financed by 
government 
Total non-security sector 
formalized civil service 
wage financed by the FGS 
budget bill minus RCRF 
“baseline” financing of civil 
service divided by the total 
non-security sector 
formalized civil service 
wage bill 
Annual 
 
FGS MoF 
 
FGS Budget documents 
 
FGS MoF 
 
Eligible civil servants salaries paid on time 
Percentage of civil 
servants’ salaries paid 
within 3 days of the end of 
the nominal payroll month. 
Month 
 
Progress 
Report and 
MA Advisory 
Reports 
 
Progress Report and MA 
Advisory Reports 
 
EGS MoF 
 
Number of FMS signing Service Delivery 
Transfer Agreements with FGS 
Number of FMS signing 
Service Delivery Transfer 
Agreements with FGS in 
health or education sector. 
Annual 
 
Signed Service 
Delivery 
Transfer 
Agreement 
Document collation  
 
FGS/FMS MoF 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 39 of 94 
 
For 2025 and 2026, since 
the PBC 7 and 8 does not 
require the signing of the 
service deliver agreements, 
number of FMS complying 
with either PBC 7 or 8 
requirements. 
 
Female Health Workers selected 
according to guidelines, trained, and 
actively providing services 
Cumulative number of 
Female Health Workers 
across all FMS selected 
according to guidelines, 
trained, and actively 
providing services. The 
cumulative targeted 
number of 3,000 includes 
FHWs to be supported by 
Damal Caafimaad. 
Annual 
 
FMS SFMIS 
reports 
 
FMS SFMIS reports 
 
FGS MoF 
 
Number of schools that are supervised 
using digital tools, including self-
assessment 
Number of schools that are 
supervised using digital 
tools, including self-
assessment. There were 
2,020 primary and 839 
secondary schools across 
Somalia (excluding 
Somaliland) according to 
2020 EMIS data. The plan is 
to supervise not more than 
50 percent of schools 
annually and gradually 
increase the share of self-
assessed schools. 
Annual 
 
School 
Supervision 
Database, FGS 
MoECHE, FMS 
MoEs 
 
School Supervision 
Database 
 
FGS MoECHE 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 40 of 94 
 
Number of schools that are self-
assessed (cumulative) 
Self-assessment means 
submission of 
questionnaire forms by 
school head-teachers or 
CECs using digital tools, 
such as mobile or web-
based applications. 
Annual 
 
FGS MoECHE 
School 
Supervision 
Database 
 
School Supervision 
Database reports 
 
MoECHE 
 
 
ME PDO Table SPACE 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators Mapped 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Strengthen payment process for 
operational expenditures and payroll 
See verification protocol 
for PBC 2 
Annual 
(June 2022 
and June 
2023) 
 
Business 
Process and 
Institutional 
Review 
 
Business Process and 
Institutional Review 
Reports 
 
FGS MoF 
 
Strengthen domestic revenue 
administration 
See the verification 
protocol for PBC 1 
Annual 
 
FGS 
(Mogadishu), 
PSS (Bosaso) 
and JSS 
(Kismayo) 
MoF Revenue 
Departments 
 
See the verification 
protocol for PBC 1 
 
Independent Verification 
Agent (OAuG) 
 
Consolidated fiscal reports published 
online by FGS Ministry of Finance 
Number of 
monthly/quarterly 
consolidated fiscal reports 
published online. End 
target represents 12 
monthly reports published 
Monthly/Q
uarterly 
 
FGS Ministry 
of Finance 
Website 
 
FGS MoF Website 
 
FGS MoF 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 41 of 94 
 
in the last 12 months. 
Strengthen inter-governmental fiscal 
policy framework 
See the verification 
protocol for PBC 3 
Annual  
 
FGS Budget 
Documents 
 
FGS Budget Documents 
 
FGS MoF 
 
Strengthen FGS transfers to FMS 
FGS’s fiscal transfers 
execution rate for the 
previous FY to FMS/BRA 
and the out turn rate for 
FGS’s domestic revenues 
for the previous year. 
Annual  
 
FGS Budget 
and SFMIS 
reports 
 
FGS Budget and SFMIS 
reports 
 
OAG 
 
Number of women and children visited by 
Female Health Workers 
Number of unique 
pregnant women and 
children visited by FHW 
Annual 
 
FGS and FMS 
FHW 
dashboard 
 
FHW digital reports 
 
FGS MoH 
 
Community health service delivery plan 
funds executed in a timely manner, in line 
with Service Delivery Agreement 
Percentage of funds 
executed in timely manner 
Annual 
 
FMS SFMIS 
reports 
 
FMS SFMIS reports 
 
FMS MoH, FMS MoF 
 
The share of FHWs complying with the 
monthly requirements of reporting with 
the prescribed digital tools 
The share of FHWs out of 
the total number of fully 
trained FHWs at the time 
of reporting that submit 
daily activity tracker forms 
on a regular basis (at least 
18 days a month) using the 
prescribed digital tools 
(ODK or any other digital 
data collection app) 
Quarterly 
 
FGS and FMS 
MoH 
 
ODK reports 
 
FGS MoH 
 
Strengthen education service delivery 
See the verification 
protocol for PBC 8 
Semi-
Annual 
starting 
November 
FMS Ministry 
of Education, 
FMS Ministry 
of Finance 
VA to obtain 
documentation and 
undertake assessment 
 
OAuG and FMS OAuG 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 42 of 94 
 
2022 
 
 
Share of teachers reporting timely 
payment of salaries through citizen 
engagement mechanisms, disaggregated 
by gender 
Teachers reporting to the 
Mogadishu-based call 
center on the date of their 
monthly salary payments 
Annual 
 
Call center 
reports, 
FGS/FMS FMIS 
system 
reports 
 
Call center reports, 
FGS/FMS FMIS system 
reports 
 
FMS MoE, FMS MoF, 
participating schools. 
 
Share of female teachers reporting 
timely payment of salaries through 
citizen engagement mechanisms 
Share of female teachers 
out of the total number of 
female teachers that report 
timely payment of salaries 
through citizen 
engagement mechanisms 
such as voice calls or sms 
from/to the Call Center 
Annual 
 
Call Center 
reports 
 
Share of female teachers 
out of the total number 
of female teachers that 
report timely payment 
of salaries through 
citizen engagement 
mechanisms such as 
voice calls or sms 
from/to the Call Center 
 
FGS MOF 
 
Improved budget transparency through 
public participation in budget process 
Based on the methodology 
established by Open 
Budget Index (OBI) 
Annual 
 
Open Budget 
Index 
 
Based on the 
methodology 
established by OBI 
 
Open Budget 
Partnership 
 
Number of total beneficiaries connected 
through citizen engagement ICT systems, 
disaggregated by target beneficiary group 
Number of distinct 
individuals who have 
received and then 
responded to a message 
from the platform. 
Beneficiaries may include, 
among others, FHWs, 
teachers, pregnant 
mothers, civil servants, 
CECs, health committees, 
Annual 
 
Call Center  
 
Call Center reports 
 
RCRF PIU 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 43 of 94 
 
parents, FHW beneficiaries, 
and other project direct 
and indirect beneficiaries. 
ICT-based engagement 
platform includes a call 
center or any other ICT 
based platform reaching 
out to beneficiaries 
through SMS, voice calls, 
WhatsApp messaging, 
robocalls, social media, etc. 
Percentage of people who shared 
feedback through citizen engagement ICT 
systems and were responded to with 
corrective actions taken by 
government, disaggregated by target 
beneficiary group 
The feedback mechanisms 
for the project are divided 
into two categories: 
grievance mechanisms 
(GM) and service delivery 
(SD) feedback. SD related 
feedback is based on 
messages related to 
implementation support, 
health, and governance 
outcomes that are sent to 
civil servants and 
beneficiaries to gauge their 
level of satisfaction, their 
use of government services 
and to understand if they 
are adhering to 
recommended behavior 
change and other 
outcomes. Beneficiaries 
may include, among 
Annual 
 
Call Center 
 
Call Center reports 
 
RCRF PIU 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 44 of 94 
 
others, FHWs, teachers, 
pregnant mothers, civil 
servants, CECs, health 
committees, parents, FHW 
beneficiaries, and other 
project direct and indirect 
beneficiaries. ICT-based 
engagement platform 
includes a call center or 
any other ICT based 
platform reaching out to 
beneficiaries through SMS, 
voice calls, WhatsApp 
messaging, robocalls, social 
media, etc. 
 
ME IO Table SPACE 
 
Performance-Based Conditions Matrix 
 
DLI IN01394165 ACTION 
 
PBC 1 
Strengthen domestic revenue administration 
Type of PBC 
Scalability 
Unit of Measure 
Total Allocated Amount (USD) 
As % of Total Financing Amount 
Output 
Yes 
Text 
3.00 0.00 
Baseline 
Poor systems capacity: organizational, 
technology, human resources and workflows 
to support effective and efficient customs and 
inland revenue management. 
 
 
2021 
 
0.00 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Second Additional Financing for Somalia Recurrent Cost and Reform Financing Project Phase III (P181407) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 45 of 94 
 
2022 
1.1. MoF has developed and put into operation 
the SOMCAS system in Mogadishu Airport and 
Seaport. 
1.00 
Each location - 50% 
2023 
1.2. MoF has (i) completed a simplified 
functional review of FGS customs to better 
allocate HR in customs' (ii) adopted SOMCAS 
procedures manuals. 
0.50 
Achievement of (i) and (b) each 
qualifies to 50% of the allocated 
amount 
2024 
1.3. FGS and PSS have procured the services of 
a ‘third party’ to develop and implement ITAS 
0.50 
Each location - 50% 
2025 
 
0.00 
 
2026 
1.4. Harmonized TIN structure implemented 
between FGS, PSS, JSS 
0.50 
FGS and each FMS - 33.3% 
 
1.5. FGS implemented inland revenue 
Integrated tax administration automation 
system (ITAS) 
0.50 
Each tax instrument - 50% 
Action: This PBC has been Revised. See below. 
 
 
DLI IN01394340 ACTION 
 
PBC 1 
Strengthen domestic revenue administration 
Type of PBC 
Scalability 
Unit of Measure 
Total Allocated Amount (USD) 
As % of Total Financing Amount 
Output 
Yes 
Text 
6.50 0.00 
Baseline 
Poor systems capacity: org