 
 
Document of 
The World Bank 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
Report No: PAD5570 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
 
PROJECT PAPER 
ON A 
PROPOSED GRANT 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 76.1 MILLION 
(US$100 MILLION EQUIVALENT  
OF WHICH US$80 MILLION FROM THE CRISIS RESPONSE WINDOW) 
 
TO THE 
 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 
 
FOR A 
THIRD ADDITIONAL FINANCING FOR THE SHOCK RESPONSIVE SAFETY NET FOR 
HUMAN CAPITAL PROJECT 
 
December 4, 2023 
 
 
 
 
Social Protection and Jobs Global Practice 
Eastern and Southern Africa Region 
  
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
 
Exchange Rate Effective October 31, 2023 
 
Currency Unit =  US$ 
SDR 0.761 = US$1 
US$1.314 = SDR 1 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 - December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Victoria Kwakwa 
Country Director: Keith E. Hansen 
Regional Director: Daniel Dulitzky 
Practice Manager: Suleiman Namara 
Task Team Leaders: Ali Nadeem Qureshi, Mona Luisa Niebuhr 
  
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
AF 
Additional Financing 
AM 
Accountability Mechanism 
ASA 
Advisory Services and Analytics 
CFM 
Common Feedback Mechanism 
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework 
CRW 
Crisis Response Window 
CSC 
Community Selection Committee 
E&S 
Environmental and Social 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
ECT 
Emergency Cash Transfer 
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMS 
Federal Member States 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GDWG 
Government-led Donor Working Group 
GHG 
Greenhouse Gas 
GRM  
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service 
HIPC 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 
HLO 
High-Level Outcome 
IDP 
Internally Displaced Person 
IOM 
International Organization for Migration 
IPC 
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification 
IPF 
Investment Project Financing 
ISR 
Implementation Status and Results Report 
LMP 
Labor Management Procedures 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MIS 
Management Information System 
MoLSA 
Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs 
NSPSC 
National Social Protection Steering Committee  
OCHA 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PMT 
Proxy Means Test 
SEA/SH 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment 
SGBV 
Sexual and Gender-Based Violence 
SNHCP 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project 
SNLRP 
Shock Responsive Safety Net for Locust Response Project 
SPWG 
Social Protection Working Group 
ToR 
Terms of Reference 
TPM 
Third-Party Monitoring 
UCT 
Unconditional Cash Transfer 
 
 
 
UN 
United Nations 
UNICEF 
United Nations Children’s Fund 
USR 
Unified Social Registry 
WFP 
World Food Programme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Somalia 
 
Third Additional Financing for the Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
  
I. 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING ........................................ 7 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING .................................................................... 14 
III. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 17 
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................................. 19 
V. WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS .............................................................................. 27 
VI    SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES ..................................................................................... 28 
VII   DETAILED CHANGE(S) .................................................................................................... 28 
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 33 
 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Sep 28, 2023 
Page 1 of 39 
 
       
BASIC INFORMATION – PARENT (Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project - P171346) 
 
 
Country 
Product Line 
Team Leader(s) 
Somalia 
IBRD/IDA 
Ali Nadeem Qureshi 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Resp CC 
Req CC 
Practice Area (Lead) 
P171346 
Investment Project 
Financing 
HAES2 (10211) AECE2 (6542) 
Social Protection & Jobs 
  
Implementing Agency: Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs 
 ADD FIN TBL1 
Is this a regionally tagged 
project? 
 
No 
 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
 
No 
 
Approval Date 
Closing Date 
Expected 
Guarantee 
Expiration Date 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification 
08-Aug-2019 
31-Dec-2024  
Moderate 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Parent 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach [MPA] 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[  ] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[✓] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
 
Development Objective(s) 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Sep 28, 2023 
Page 2 of 39 
 
The project development objective is to provide cash transfers to targeted poor and vulnerable households and 
establish the key building blocks of a national shock-responsive safety net system. 
 
Ratings (from Parent ISR) 
 RATING_DRAFT_
NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation 
Latest ISR 
 
22-Dec-2020 
24-Jun-2021 
14-Jan-2022 
08-Aug-2022 
20-Feb-2023 
16-Aug-2023 
Progress towards 
achievement of 
PDO 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Overall 
Implementation 
Progress (IP) 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Overall ESS 
Performance 
MS 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Overall Risk 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Financial 
Management 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
Project 
Management 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Procurement 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
MS 
 
S 
 
S 
 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
MS 
 
MU 
 
MU 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project 
Third Additional Financing - P181469) 
 
ADDFIN_TABLE 
Project ID 
Project Name 
Additional Financing Type 
Urgent Need or Capacity 
Constraints 
P181469 
Somalia Shock Responsive 
Safety Net for Human 
Capital Project Third 
Additional Financing 
Restructuring, Scale Up 
Yes 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Sep 28, 2023 
Page 3 of 39 
 
Financing instrument 
Product line 
Approval Date 
Investment Project 
Financing 
IBRD/IDA 
15-Dec-2023 
Projected Date of Full 
Disbursement 
Bank/IFC Collaboration   
 
 
30-Apr-2026 
No 
 
 
Is this a regionally tagged project? 
 
No 
 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities  Child 
 
 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a Non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[✓] Responding to Natural or Man-made disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
 
 Disbursement Summary (from Parent ISR) 
 
Source of Funds 
Net  
Commitments 
Total Disbursed 
Remaining Balance 
Disbursed 
IBRD 
 
 
 
  
 
 % 
IDA 
 318.00 
 239.31 
  68.92 
    
 
78 % 
Grants 
 
 
 
  
 
 % 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital 
Project Third Additional Financing - P181469) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Sep 28, 2023 
Page 4 of 39 
 
SUMMARY (Total Financing) 
 
Current Financing 
Proposed Additional 
Financing 
Total Proposed 
Financing 
Total Project Cost 
318.00 
100.00 
418.00 
Total Financing 
318.00 
100.00 
418.00 
of which IBRD/IDA  
318.00 
100.00 
418.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
 
 
DETAILSNewFinEnh1- Additional Financing 
World Bank Group Financing 
     International Development Association (IDA) 
100.00 
          IDA Grant 
100.00 
 
   
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions) 
 Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
SML Amount 
Guarantee 
Amount 
Total Amount 
Somalia 
0.00 
 100.00 
0.00 
   0.00 
 100.00 
National 
Performance-Based 
Allocations (PBA) 
0.00 
  20.00 
0.00 
   0.00 
  20.00 
Crisis Response 
Window (CRW) 
0.00 
  80.00 
0.00 
   0.00 
  80.00 
Total 
0.00 
100.00 
   0.00 
   0.00 
100.00 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
Does the project require any other Policy waiver(s)? 
[    ] Yes   [ ✔ ] No 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Sep 28, 2023 
Page 5 of 39 
 
 
ESStandards 
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Not Currently Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Not Currently Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Not Currently Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Not Currently Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
ESStandardsNote 
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Social Protection & Jobs 
 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Governance 
Health, Nutrition & Population 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Sep 28, 2023 
Page 6 of 39 
 
PROJECT TEAM 
 
Bank Staff 
Name 
Role 
Specialization 
Unit 
Ali Nadeem Qureshi 
Team Leader (ADM 
Responsible) 
Social Protection 
HAES2 
Mona Luisa Niebuhr 
Team Leader 
Social Protection 
HAES2 
Francis Akolu Muthuiya 
Procurement Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Procurement 
EAERU 
Stephen Diero Amayo 
Financial Management 
Specialist (ADM Responsible) 
Financial Management 
EAEG1 
Abdirahman Zeila Dubow 
Environmental Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Environment 
SAEE2 
Raymond Simon Maina 
Kirwa 
Social Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Social Safeguards 
SAES2 
Dhahabu Ibrahim Shair 
Social Specialist 
Social Safegaurds 
SAES2 
George Ferreira Da Silva 
Team Member 
WFA 
WFACS 
Janerose Muboka Lubisia 
Team Member 
Country Office 
AEMSO 
Jazaka Alaisa Malala 
Team Member 
Country Office 
AEMSO 
Kevin Sanya Heraniah 
Team Member 
Social Protection 
HAES2 
Mariam Denise Brain 
Team Member 
Social Protection 
HAES1 
Martin M. Serrano 
Counsel 
Legal 
LEGAM 
Naseer Uddin Khan 
Team Member 
Social Protection 
HAES2 
Nisha Maria Pinho 
Team Member 
WFA 
WFACS 
Ntayi Anfani Bandawa 
Counsel 
Legal 
LEGAM 
Nyabicha Omurwa Onang'o Team Member 
Financial Management 
EAEG1 
Silas Udahemuka 
Team Member 
Social Protection 
HAES2 
 
Extended Team 
Name 
Title 
Organization 
Location 
Denis Nikitin 
SP Technical Consultant 
 
Washington, D.C. 
   
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 39 
 
I. 
BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
A. 
Introduction 
 
1. 
The Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) has requested additional financing (AF) to address 
drought- and flood-induced emergency needs under the Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for 
Human Capital Project (SNHCP, P171346). The financing amount is US$100 million equivalent from the 
International Development Association (IDA), including US$80 million equivalent from the Crisis Response 
Window (CRW) and US$20 million equivalent from Performance-Based Allocation. The proposed third AF 
to SNHCP will result in the provision of emergency cash transfers (ECTs) to 215,000 households affected 
by floods and drought crisis, extension of regular safety net support to existing 200,000 households for 
six months (up to June 30, 2024), and, thereafter, the extension of unconditional cash transfers (UCTs) to 
a recertified cohort of 50,000 beneficiaries. The AF will ensure that the coverage of cash transfers to the 
most vulnerable continues to meet the scale and scope of need in the context of the scale-down of 
humanitarian assistance. In addition, the FGS requested a SNHCP restructuring to invest in key building 
blocks for resilience to future crises by expanding the Unified Social Registry (USR) surveys nationwide 
and changing the implementation modality for the Baxnaano urban expansion from the United Nations 
(UN) to direct implementation. This AF will apply the procedures under paragraph 12 of Section III of the 
World Bank Investment Project Financing (IPF) Policy, Preparation of Investment Project Financing - 
Projects in Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, given the country context 
characterized by fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) and low institutional capacity. The AF activities are 
consistent with the original Project Development Objective (PDO) and are strategically aligned with the 
National Social Protection Policy (2019) and the World Bank forthcoming Country Partnership Framework 
(CPF) for the period of FY24–28 for Somalia. 
B. 
Country Context 
 
2. 
Somalia is facing a rapidly unfolding humanitarian catastrophe, driven by the longest and most 
severe drought in at least 40 years. Somalia has faced six substandard rainy seasons, gradually increasing 
the scale and scope of humanitarian needs. The outlook for the second half of 2023 remains dire, in 
anticipation of a strong El Niño associated with severe rains, flooding, displacement, and loss of lives and 
livelihoods. An important contributing and complicating factor is the suspension of the Black Sea Grain 
Initiative in July 2023. This has aggravated the financing gap as Somalia relies heavily on imported food 
commodities. In 2023, an estimated 8.25 million people, nearly half of Somalia’s population, require 
immediate humanitarian assistance with more than 1.5 million internally displaced persons (IDPs) due to 
the drought, including 369,000 in the first half of 2023.1 This drives the cumulative number of IDPs in 
Somalia to an estimated 3.8 million.2 The drought left over 3.8 million livestock dead, eroding the primary 
source of livelihood, income, and nutrition for pastoralist communities.3 
 
1 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), 2023, Somalia Humanitarian Response Plan. 
2 International Organization for Migration (IOM), 2023, Displacement in Somalia Reaches Record High 3.8 million: IOM Deputy 
Director General Calls for Sustainable Solutions. https://www.iom.int/news/displacement-somalia-reaches-record-high-38-
million-iom-deputy-director-general-calls-sustainable-solutions. 
3 OCHA, 2023, Somalia Humanitarian Response Plan. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 39 
 
3. 
While famine conditions have been averted in early 2023, the latest acute food insecurity and 
acute malnutrition analysis report, published on September 18, 2023, shows 4.3 million individuals 
projected as acutely food insecure (IPC 3+4) between October and December 2023. The scale and 
severity of needs extend across water, sanitation, and health, with millions of people requiring 
humanitarian assistance. Malnutrition levels are alarmingly high with more than 1.5 million children under 
the age of five facing acute malnutrition, of which 331,000 are experiencing severe acute malnutrition. An 
additional 1.1 million children of the same age are exposed to moderate acute malnutrition. 
4. 
Somalia continues to contend with increasingly frequent shocks in the context of widespread 
FCV. Recurrent climate-related shocks such as cycles of droughts and floods, locust infestation, higher 
international commodity prices, as well as increased insecurity and conflict have interrupted the country’s 
growth trajectory and slowed the transition from fragility. Real gross domestic product (GDP) growth 
averaged only 2 percent per year in 2018–22, while real GDP per capita averaged −0.8 percent per year. 
The World Bank’s November 2023 Somalia Economic Update and the May 2023 International Monetary 
Fund Extended Credit Facility Review underlined the significant impact of the drought on economic 
growth in 2022 and 2023. This comes on the back of the ‘triple crisis’ of COVID-19, the desert locust 
infestation, and floods, which significantly reduced economic growth in 2020 and 2021. 
5. 
Repeated shocks have eroded households’ asset base and purchasing power, increasing the risk 
of more people falling into poverty. As a result of protracted conflict, two generations of youth have been 
denied education, livelihoods, and chances of a normal and peaceful life. One in three youth are neither 
employed nor in education or training.5 At the same, they represent a critical national resource to drive 
peace, stability, economic growth, and national transformation. 
6. 
Limited fiscal space severely constrains the government’s ability to respond to multiple shocks 
while gradually transitioning development financing from grants to loans. Somalia is expected to reach 
Completion Point of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative by the end of 2023. At that point, 
the country will receive full and irrevocable debt relief. On July 28, 2023, the World Bank approved a 
Somalia Second Inclusive Growth Development Policy Operation (P179307) to address fiscal pressures, 
enhance economic resilience, and provide necessary support to reach HIPC completion. These resources 
however will not be able to prioritize drought and flood response at scale. 
C. 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
7. 
Somalia is gradually establishing the building blocks of a shock-responsive safety net system 
through the launch of its first national safety net platform, Baxnaano. The Baxnaano program was 
launched in late 2019 and is administered by the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MoLSA) on behalf of 
the FGS. It provides support to poor and vulnerable beneficiaries though two windows: 
(a) Regular window. This window aims to address chronic poverty and food security and 
enhance the human capital accumulation of beneficiary households through a UCT program 
 
4 IPC stands for Integrated Food Security Phase Classification, which is a multi-partner initiative to classify the severity and 
magnitude of food insecurity and malnutrition to facilitate decision-making. The severity phases are: (a) minimal/none, (b) 
stressed, (c) crisis, (d) emergency, and (e) catastrophe/famine. https://www.ipcinfo.org/. 
5 World Bank, 2022, Somalia Economic Update - Investing in Social Protection to Boost Resilience for Economic Growth.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 39 
 
which covers approximately 1.3 million chronically poor and vulnerable individuals, with 
focus on households with children under five years of age. The program provides reliable 
support of US$20 per month to each household for three years. The program is currently 
active in 25 districts across all Federal Member States (FMS) and Somaliland  
(b) Shock response window. This window aims at protecting the human and physical assets of 
the poor and vulnerable during shocks and enabling recovery. The window is expected to 
support a total of 3.6 million individuals with temporary ECTs, in particular climate change-
related emergencies. The window provides US$60 per month per household for a period of 
six months.  
8. 
In support of Baxnaano, SNHCP aims to provide cash transfers to targeted poor and vulnerable 
households and establish the key building blocks of a national shock-responsive social protection 
system. The parent project (US$65 million, approved on August 8, 2019) supported the FGS efforts to 
establish Baxnaano and initially financed regular cash transfers to approximately 1.2 million individuals in 
25 districts across all FMS and Somaliland. The first AF in the amount of US$110 million equivalent, 
approved on June 17, 2021, increased the duration of Baxnaano support for the same cohort to ensure 
that efforts at improving human capital could be maintained. The second AF in the amount of US$143 
million equivalent, approved on June 22, 2022, supported a response to the urgent food security needs 
of poor and vulnerable populations affected by the prevailing drought crisis which began in late 2021, 
further increased the duration of Baxnaano support for the enrolled cohort, and provided support to 
expand Baxnaano support to beneficiaries in urban areas with a focus on Banadir Regional Administration. 
In addition, the project, together with the World Bank’s complementary advisory services and analytics 
(ASA) and in collaboration with the World Food Programme (WFP) and the United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF), has been supporting MoLSA to build internal capacity and develop its own delivery systems, to 
enable transitioning to direct implementation by MoLSA. Baxnaano is gradually being recognized as a 
national social protection platform that facilitates coordination and collaboration with humanitarian 
programs, with a vision to transition from a humanitarian mode of operation and take on a longer-term 
programmatic developmental focus. 
Table 1. World Bank Financing Support to Baxnaano 
Project 
Window 
Regular Window 
UCTs 
Shock Response Window ECTs 
Number of 
Households 
Benefit Level 
Number of 
Households 
Benefit Level 
SNHCP 
(US$65 million) 
Regular 
200,000 
US$20 × 12 months 
— 
— 
SNHCP AF 
(US$110 million) 
Regular / 
Shock 
Response 
200,000 (same 
cohort) 
US$20 × additional 
12 months 
100,000 
US$60 × 6 months 
SNHCP Second 
AF 
(US$143 million) 
Regular / 
Shock 
Response 
200,000 (same 
cohort) 
US$20 × additional 
12 months 
93,000 
US$60 × 6 months 
SNLRP 
(US$40 million) 
Shock 
Response 
— 
— 
100,000 
US$60 × 6 months 
SNLRP AF 
(US$75 million) 
Shock 
Response 
— 
— 
160,000 
US$60 × 6 months 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 39 
 
9. 
The complementary Shock Responsive Safety Net for Locust Response Project (SNLRP) 
(P174065) used the Baxnaano platform to deliver ECTs to households affected by locust infestation. 
SNLRP has supported 261,993 households (over achievement against the program target of 260,000 
households in addition to the 193,000 households supported with ECTs by SNHCP) with ECTs as of 
November 30, 2023. SNLRP made good progress in contributing to the strengthening of the wider social 
protection system by supporting the ongoing registration of 330,000 families in the USR. It has achieved 
92 percent disbursement and is expected to close on March 31, 2024 (Table 1). 
D. 
Project Status 
 
10. 
SNHCP has achieved significant results and incrementally introduced important innovations to 
support the gradual establishment of a comprehensive social protection program under the leadership 
of the government. Despite the challenges posed by recurrent disasters including drought, locust 
invasion, COVID-19 pandemic, flooding, and complex political dynamics between the FGS, FMS, and 
Somaliland, as of November 2023, proceeds from the parent project and the first and second AF have 
been utilized at 78 percent disbursement (US$239.31 million). The remaining funds under SNHCP 
(US$68.92 million) are committed to meet requirements under the regular cash transfer program up to 
June 30, 2024, and for USR surveys as well as their management. Ratings for both ‘Progress Towards 
Achievement of PDO’ and ‘Overall Implementation Progress’ were Satisfactory since the beginning of the 
project. The emergency component of the second AF has been completed with 193,000 drought-affected 
households receiving or having received ECTs. Each component shows significant progress against targets: 
(a) Component 1 (Nutrition-linked Unconditional Cash Transfers) has supported 199,913 (99 
percent as of November 30, 2023) of 200,000 households under Baxnaano ‘regular’ receiving 
quarterly cash transfers up till December 31, 2023. In addition, 321,746 drought-affected 
households (95 percent as of November 30, 2023) of the program target of 338,000 
households have already been identified, screened, and verified to receive ECTs under the 
Baxnaano shock response window to cope with the impacts of the protracted natural 
disaster. Of these, 193,000 households have already received ECTs. 
(b) Component 2 (Delivery Systems and Institutional Capacity Building) is implemented under 
an Agreement for Delivery of Outputs between MoLSA and UNICEF. The development of a 
USR, Baxnaano management information system (MIS), and the overall delivery mechanism, 
which are the key building blocks of such a system, are well advanced. 
(c) 
Component 3 (Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge 
Management) has financed the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within MoLSA and helps 
strengthen horizontal coordination with other line ministries as well as between the FGS and 
FMS. 
(d) Component 4 (Household Registration in the USR) finances the expansion of the USR by 
registering households not yet included in the database using its Common Registration 
Form. The first and second rounds of surveys have been completed with the target of adding 
a total of some 250,000 households’ data into the database, which combined with the 
ongoing registration under SNLRP would expand the database to some 780,000 households. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 39 
 
11. 
Project ratings. The project fiduciary (financial management [FM] and procurement) 
arrangements are deemed to be adequate. The project continues to perform well on environmental and 
social (E&S) aspects with a functioning grievance redress mechanism (GRM) and has not reported any 
major issues. All social risk management plans for the project have been prepared by MoLSA and cleared 
by the World Bank. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) rating has been ‘Moderately Unsatisfactory’ for 
the past two Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs, February and August 2023) due to the 
unsatisfactory performance of the previous third-party monitoring (TPM) agent. Yet, MoLSA, WFP, and 
UNICEF’s reporting has been timely and relevant, with timely submission of the biannual SNHCP Progress 
Reports and regular field visits to project sites to monitor progress and gather beneficiary feedback. 
Further, a new TPM firm is in place, and the overall M&E approach for Baxnaano is currently being updated 
in the Project Implementation Manual to fully integrate lessons learned from past challenges, both of 
which are expected to lead to a further improvement in M&E management. 
E. 
Rationale for Additional Financing 
 
12. 
This AF will respond to urgent crisis needs by: (a) scaling up to extend and expand cash transfers 
to the most vulnerable and crisis-affected households, and (b) reallocating resources to invest in key 
building blocks for resilience to future crises. 
13. 
The AF will scale up emergency transfers and extend regular safety net support to the poorest 
and the most vulnerable households, drawing on CRW ‘last resort financing’. The project targets 338,000 
poor and vulnerable households affected by the drought which have already been identified and have 
suffered compounded impacts of conflict, locust invasion, COVID-19, and most recently the floods. This 
AF will provide support to an additional 1.3 million of the most food-insecure and vulnerable individuals 
in need of immediate assistance who are not currently supported by any other program. SNHCP also 
provides support to a total of 200,000 of the poorest households through UCTs, enrolled for a period of 
three years up to December 31, 2023. However, due to multiple and overlapping crises over the past three 
years, this cohort of the most vulnerable households is at risk of falling back into deep vulnerability. The 
AF will therefore support an additional six months of to the existing regular beneficiaries while additional 
accompanying measures on communication and beneficiary engagement will take place to ensure the 
cohort can exit the program. Subsequently, the project will extend support to a recertified cohort of 
50,000 beneficiaries identified using USR data and a proxy means test (PMT) based targeting approach in 
existing districts which were identified as the most food insecure and vulnerable using the District Distress 
Index.6 
14. 
The severity and extent of the drought and flood crisis have led to a significant gap in funding 
to cover households projected to be in acute food crisis conditions. About 4.3 million individuals are in 
IPC 3+ status and require urgent assistance. Based on WFP projections, contributions from development 
partners currently meet the needs of approximately 2.3 million individuals. The proposed third AF would 
result in provision of ECTs to about 1.3 million people affected by the crisis—representing one-third of 
the people currently facing crisis level and above food insecurity, thereby providing a significant 
 
6 Final selection of target districts was based on an objective distress index agreed with MoLSA and involved in-depth discussions 
and consultations with the FMS. The index prioritizes predominantly rural districts with high distress rating, which considers 
vulnerability in terms of malnutrition (prevalence of moderate acute malnutrition and severe acute malnutrition cases), and past 
impact and/or risk of drought (IPC 3+ ranking).  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 39 
 
contribution by the government. Household selection in eligible villages follows the approach currently 
practiced by the Baxnaano regular program, that is, eligible households were identified through a 
community-based targeting process whereby community selection committees (CSCs), with support from 
UN agencies and their implementing partners, identified the poorest households as perceived by the 
community. The support provides much needed relief and prevents negative coping strategies, providing 
households with a chance to address their current needs while beginning the process of recovery from 
the impacts of recurrent shocks. While identifying new ECT beneficiaries, the implementing agency will 
use strengthened risk management protocols described below. 
15. 
Existing implementation arrangements have been tested and used for over three years, 
resulting in strong operational experience in delivery of social assistance to populations in urgent need. 
The parent project supported efforts to address the drought crisis by frontloading cash transfer allocations 
toward shock-responsive top-ups to 175,000 of the 200,000 regular households through vertical 
expansion. The compounded shocks had pushed these households into extreme food insecurity and 
poverty as livelihoods were lost and families displaced. Given the pressing needs of the poor and 
vulnerable population which were further exacerbated by the drought, the FGS considers a horizontal 
expansion to provide cash transfers to support consumption smoothing an appropriate response. 
16. 
The AF will build a bridge for future sustainability by investing in key building blocks for 
resilience and shock responsiveness to future crises, through a restructuring and reallocation of 
requisite resources. This entails expanding USR surveys nationwide and changing the implementation 
modality for the Baxnaano urban expansion from the UN to direct implementation. These investments 
are necessary to ensure that the national social protection platform can respond to shocks faster and with 
greater accuracy. At the institutional level, the nationwide expansion of the USR database will significantly 
strengthen system-wide Government-led coordination and improve targeting efficiency for future shock 
response while improving risk management. The investments will allow de-duplication of beneficiaries 
across different funding sources and further improve traceability of services received. Through these 
enhancements, the USR will enable a rapid and transparent response to future crises, removing key 
weaknesses in targeting and enrolment processes that creates a possibility of exploitation of beneficiaries 
of humanitarian support. As is evident in a context of multiple overlapping crises and large-scale 
humanitarian response, it is essential to build tools that allow transparent and efficient targeting of 
beneficiaries and strengthen systems that improve coordination of the response. The USR will be at the 
core of a national adaptive social protection platform which builds resilience by protecting the poorest 
using safety nets, cushions households from economic shocks, promotes human capital accumulation, 
and improves labor market outcomes. 
17. 
There is an urgent need for the World Bank’s support. With low domestic revenues and 
significant gap in international financing to support food security, especially in the context of current 
global emergencies and competing demands for crisis response, the World Bank’s engagement will be 
essential in ensuring the poor and vulnerable are protected during this period as they face difficulties in 
meeting basic needs. The World Bank has a comparative advantage in addressing the demand-side 
pressures by financing transfers and supporting the refinement of the service delivery process. This will 
also help ease the financial burden on the humanitarian system, which is struggling to respond to the 
back-to-back and concurrent shocks of the last few years and the scale-down of the response following 
the funding surge in 2022. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 39 
 
F. 
Strategic Relevance 
 
18. 
Social protection continues to be a critical element in the FGS fight against poverty and efforts 
to promote prosperity. The parent project and the proposed third AF are aligned directly with the FGS’s 
national strategy and policy. The Ninth National Development Plan (2020–2024) dedicates its Pillar 4 to 
social development, which entails “strategies and interventions that improve access by Somali citizens to 
health, education and other essential services, including social protection systems in times of extreme 
need”. More specifically, the Somalia Social Protection Policy (2019) defines social protection as 
“government-led policies and programs, which address predictable needs throughout the life cycle in 
order to protect all groups, and particularly the poor and vulnerable, against shocks, help them to manage 
risks, and provide them with opportunities to overcome poverty, vulnerability, and exclusion.” The 
complementary Social Protection Policy Implementation Framework (2019) is structured around seven 
policy priorities, including “unconditional assistance for the poorest and neediest,” and “foundational 
systems and capabilities,” both of which are directly supported by project investments in cash transfers 
and delivery mechanisms. The project directly complements the government’s Baxnaano Roadmap 
(2023–28) and supports its implementation. 
19. 
The parent project and the proposed AF continue to support the World Bank’s developmental 
vision for Somalia and the Eastern and Southern Africa region more broadly. The World Bank Group’s 
CPF for FY19–22 for Somalia (Report No. 124734-SO), discussed by the Board on August 29, 2018, and 
extended through FY23 by the Performance and Learning Review (Report No. 176049), as one of its four 
focus areas, supports strengthening institutions to deliver services and highlights the World Bank’s intent 
to build on existing technologies and programs to support development of a shock-responsive safety net 
system and thereby test a new model of state-facilitated resilience building. In regard to the forthcoming 
CPF for FY24-28, the AF will directly contribute to the Objective 2.2 “Increase coverage of the social 
protection system” under High-Level Outcome (HLO) 2 “Enhanced Human Capital”. It will also contribute 
to the Objective 2.3 “Improve utilization of essential health and nutrition services”; HLO 1 “Inclusive, 
private sector led job creation and economic growth;” and HLO 3 “Greater Resilience to climatic and other 
shocks”. Furthermore, the World Bank Group’s Africa Regional Strategy envisages investing in people and 
supporting climate change mitigation and adaptation, both of which are directly financed via shock-
responsive cash transfers to promote the uptake of nutrition services. 
20. 
At a global level, the World Bank Group’s Strategy for FCV (2020–2025), which has established 
a framework for such settings, commits to remaining engaged during situations of crisis. This entails 
building resilience, protecting essential institutions, and delivering critical services—actions which the 
proposed AF directly addresses and promotes. Moreover, the strategy recognizes the need to build 
partnerships with humanitarian actors and has cited the project’s collaboration with WFP and UNICEF as 
good practice examples as part of its Famine Action Mechanism, which provides a model for sharing 
information on food insecurity situations and mobilizing anticipatory action before the onset of major 
shocks. 
21. 
More broadly, the project is aligned with the Evolution priorities and the World Bank’s new 
mission to end extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity on a livable planet.  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 39 
 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
 
A. 
Overview 
 
22. 
The proposed AF and concurrent restructuring will support the scale-up of emergency support 
and extension of the regular Baxnaano program and strengthen key building blocks for resilience to 
future shocks. No changes will be made to the PDO or the implementation arrangements by component. 
Changes are being made to: (a) components, costs, and scope of activities; (b) indicators and selected 
results targets; (c) disbursement arrangements; and (d) closing date. The full amount of the AF will be 
added to Component 1 to reach 215,000 drought-affected households with rapid ECTs while IDA resources 
will extend regular cash transfers by six months (up to June 30, 2024) to the existing 200,000 households 
and thereafter extend UCTs to a recertified cohort of 50,000 beneficiaries. 
23. 
The restructuring will help put in place the urgently needed building blocks for resilience at the 
system and individual levels to future crises. These foundational building blocks include expanding the 
ongoing USR surveys to provide national coverage and changing the implementation modality for the 
Baxnaano urban expansion from the UN to direct implementation. The reallocation will finance the 
expansion of the social registry survey to two million households. 
24. 
Implementation arrangements. Implementation arrangements remain largely unchanged by 
component, with WFP continuing to implement activities of UCT and ECT under Component 1, UNICEF 
continuing until the end of their output agreement under Component 2, and MoLSA implementing 
Components 3 and 4. The Recipient will by not later than three (3) months after the AF effectiveness date, 
update the output agreement with WFP in order to, inter alia, extend WFP’s services for the provision of 
cash transfers under the AF. The reallocation marks an important shift toward direct government 
implementation for the USR survey and Baxnaano urban expansion. In order to facilitate this shift, the 
disbursement arrangements have been adjusted to lower the limit for direct payments. Based on the 
satisfactory track record in fiduciary and E&S risk management, this is an important step toward building 
key social protection systems and building the government’s capacity to deliver services. It will be 
accompanied by robust World Bank technical assistance. 
B. 
Components and Costs 
 
25. 
The proposed AF will exclusively finance Component 1. Table 2 provides an overview of the total 
financing per component across the original project, two previous additional financings, and the proposed 
additional financing.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 39 
 
Table 2. Allocation by Component  
IDA Commitment (US$ million equivalent) 
Component 
Implementatio
n 
Arrangement 
Original 
Project 
First AF 
Second AF 
Proposed AF/Restructuring 
Total 
Third AF 
Reallocation 
1 Nutrition-linked 
Unconditional 
Cash Transfers 
WFP 
53 
108 
138 
100 
-40 
359 
2 Delivery 
Systems and 
Institutional 
Capacity 
Building 
UNICEF 
6 
— 
— 
— 
— 
6 
3 Project 
Management, 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation, and 
Knowledge 
Management 
MoLSA 
6 
2 
— 
— 
+13 
21 
4 Household 
Registration in 
the USR 
MoLSA 
— 
— 
5 
— 
+27 
32 
Total 
  
65 
110 
143 
100 
0 
418 
Note: This table reflects the amounts committed as per the US$ to SDR exchange rate at the time of project 
approval. This does not reflect the exchange rate losses/gains between SDR and US$ since approval of the 
respective facilities which amounts to a total loss of almost US$18 million in November 2023.  
26. 
Component 1: Nutrition-linked Unconditional Cash Transfers (total US$359 million equivalent, 
including US$100 million equivalent under the proposed AF). All proceeds from the AF will be exclusively 
utilized to support the Baxnaano program’s provision of cash transfers to the most crisis-affected, 
vulnerable households to protect them from the impact of the ongoing severe drought and 2023-2024 
floods. The distribution of beneficiaries and associated benefits would be as follows: 
(a) About 215,000 drought-affected households, representing one third of acutely food 
insecure households, will receive six months of ECT (US$60 per household monthly) to cope 
with the effects of the drought crisis; 145,000 households are already identified under the 
agreed selection criteria, and 70,000 additional drought-affected households will be 
identified using the agreed selection criteria incorporating agreed risk management 
protocols. 
(b) The current cohort of 200,000 poor households enrolled in the regular window of Baxnaano 
are entitled to three years of benefits. This represents 13 percent of the population living 
below the poverty line in Somalia. After expiry of the three-year period, a new cohort of 
beneficiaries selected by using the data being collected in the USR and PMT was envisaged. 
The restructuring will allow an additional period of six months of support to the current 
group of beneficiaries up to June 30, 2024, to counteract the impact of the ongoing 
overlapping crisis effect on these poorest and most vulnerable households. The additional 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 39 
 
period of support will also allow the government to undertake an intensive 
communications/awareness campaign with communities on the upcoming changes and will 
allow time for completion of ongoing USR surveys for data collection in targeted districts. 
(c) 
Building on the communication campaign and recertification, support will be provided to a 
recertified cohort of 50,000 poorest households. Beneficiaries will be selected by using the 
data being collected in the USR and based on the newly introduced PMT.  
27. 
The cash transfers will continue with the same implementation arrangements through WFP and 
the same geographical scope. However, risk management protocols will be strengthened in line with 
details provided in the risk section. 
28. 
Component 2: Delivery Systems and Institutional Capacity Building (US$6 million equivalent). 
The originally allocated US$6 million equivalent for the component remains unchanged. Over the course 
of implementation, the project experienced exchange rate losses between SDR and US$. As this 
component is implemented under an output agreement with UNICEF, US$354,233 equivalent will be 
reallocated from Component 1 to ensure the availability of US$6 million under this component. 
29. 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Management 
(US$26 million equivalent7). The distribution of beneficiaries and associated benefits would be as follows: 
(a) The implementation modality for the Baxnaano urban expansion will be changed from UN 
to direct implementation. The urban expansion activity approved under the second AF will 
be moved from Component 1 to Component 3 to allow MoLSA to implement the 
intervention. The shift to government-led implementation is essential to build resilient and 
sustainable systems for future crisis response. This includes use of the newly established USR 
and improving links with available health and nutrition services and labor market 
opportunities. The health and nutrition links will be introduced in collaboration with the 
Improving Healthcare Services in Somalia Project (“Damal Caafimaad,” P172031) and the 
United Kingdom’s Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office health program 
supporting the provision of similar services. 
(b) Additional resources are being allocated to allow the MoLSA PIU to continue providing 
implementation support for the additional implementation period of one year and offset 
exchange rate losses incurred under the with UN agencies under the project and absorbed 
under this component. 
30. 
Component 4: Household Registration in the USR (US$32 million equivalent). The additional 
support will allow for a nationwide scale-up of data collection activities enabling the government to collect 
socioeconomic information for all accessible households in the country. This nationwide expansion is 
especially important due to the use of Baxnaano to respond through vertical and horizontal expansions 
to the continued impacts of climate change-induced shocks. It is estimated that an additional 1.8 million 
households will be surveyed. To further enhance reliability of the data and ensure quality of the collected 
data, an independent third-party firm will conduct quality assurance and monitoring of the data collection 
 
7 Reallocation within the first AF - US$3,437,571 equivalent from Component 1 to Component 3 as all obligations to WFP under 
the grant have been met with full disbursement under the MOLSA-WFP output agreement achieved. Reallocation within the 
second AF - US$16,702,790 equivalent from Component 1 to Component 3. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 39 
 
process. Finally, MoLSA’s capacity will be strengthened and further complemented by robust World Bank 
technical assistance on standard operating procedures for data collection, data protection, and privacy. 
31. 
No changes are made to the PDO, but targets for results indicators are modified. The target for 
PDO indicator ‘beneficiaries of social safety net programs’ is revised to 2,520,000 (up from 2,250,000). 
The change incorporates the scale-up under this AF and incorporates adjustments made necessary due to 
a higher number of Baxnaano regular beneficiaries having required shock-responsive top-ups than initially 
planned. 
32. 
Extension of the closing date. To implement the AF activities, particularly the USR surveys and 
Baxnaano urban expansion, the FGS has requested an extension of the closing date by one year from 
December 31, 2024, to December 31, 2025.  
III. 
KEY RISKS 
 
33. 
The overall risk rating is Substantial. 
34. 
Political and governance risks remain high, due to Somalia’s FCV status with a fluid political 
scenario and ongoing insecurity, compounded by a lack of government presence in parts of the country. 
Such risks had intensified over the past year with the protracted elections across the FMS and militant 
strikes on government and electoral targets during a period of political uncertainty. The complex 
relationship between the FGS, FMS, and Somaliland, the lack of government presence in parts of the 
country; a volatile security situation, and the ongoing anti-terror campaign can restrict access to project 
sites for cash delivery and/or monitoring of implementation. The election process has now concluded with 
a peaceful transfer of power, and transitional plans from international to national security arrangements 
are being put into action and are expected to bring relative improvement. Mitigating measures will include 
ongoing engagement with UN agencies, nongovernmental organizations, and private sector entities who 
already have good working relationships with the FGS, FMS, and communities through humanitarian 
interventions. The proposed AF also provides an operational platform for promoting the dialogue 
between the FGS and FMS around protecting poor and vulnerable citizens and building bridges for 
collaboration in service delivery. 
35. 
The macroeconomic risk is considered high as Somalia remains fiscally fragile, with a weak 
revenue base, continually battered by overlapping and persistent crises. Somalia has withstood multiple 
shocks and challenges, including the global COVID-19 pandemic, prolonged and severe drought, desert 
locust infestation, significant security risks, all while preserving political stability following Presidential and 
Parliamentary elections. However, rapidly increasing basic food prices and rising fuel prices globally have 
further compounded inflationary impacts in the country with fertilizer and transport costs also moving 
upward. These inflationary impacts could result in the loss of purchasing power of cash transfers and 
further threaten food security of millions across the country. Baxnaano program will continue to rely on 
WFP and other partners to continuously assess market conditions to determine how the program can 
adjust to respond effectively. Further, the program costing will build in measures to absorb potential 
future increase of prices. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 39 
 
36. 
Risks arising from sector strategies and policies remain substantial in the context of political 
uncertainties. The FGS is committed to establishing an effective national social protection system, as 
elaborated in its high-level strategic and policy documents; however, changes in government leadership 
and capacity constraints at all levels can risk slowing down progress on the sectoral agenda. In this regard, 
the World Bank ASA - Somalia Social Protection Support: Building Blocks Towards a National Social 
Protection System completed in September 2023 - has been critical in ensuring that the FGS receives just-
in-time advisory support in the formulation of broader strategy and policy, as well as on operational 
matters that affect project performance and outcomes. A new programmatic ASA: Building an Adaptive 
National Social Protection System is being initiated to continue crucial provision of just-in-time advisory 
support. Under the new ASA, the World Bank will provide technical assistance for policy reform leading 
to long-term institutional sustainability and sustained financing for social protection. The USR is a key 
element in ensuring sustainability of interventions by improving coordination, crowding in 
complementary funding, and allowing rapid adaptive response to shocks.  
37. 
Risks arising from institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability are increased to 
high as changes in leadership, increased perception of fraud risks, and limited availability of financing 
resources can affect the implementation momentum achieved to date. At the policy level, the National 
Social Protection Steering Committee (NSPSC) and Social Protection Working Group (SPWG) chaired by 
the Office of the Prime Minister and MoLSA, respectively, are expected to smoothen intergovernmental 
coordination and coordination with development partners. The SPWG has been convening at regular 
intervals; however, the NSPSC has not been able to convene since its establishment in 2020. MoLSA has 
proposed the introduction of a new bill in the Parliament to s. If the bill is endorsed by the Parliament, it 
will lead to a significant reduction in risks. On the operational level, there are multiple added layers to 
monitor, including possible risks of leakage and other types of fraud. To mitigate these risks, the project 
will support several measures. First, the project will support the undertaking of a de-duplication exercise 
within the implementing agencies’ master registry to identify any overlap of beneficiaries across funding 
sources from different humanitarian and development partners. This will be achieved using secure 
biometrically enhanced beneficiary identification and transfer of electronic beneficiary lists to the mobile 
network provider through secure data exchange protocols. Second, post-distribution monitoring 
conducted by the implementing agency will be strengthened with strong and regular field monitoring by 
WFP and MoLSA staff and site visits by the TPM agency. The TPM arrangement specifically has been 
significantly improved and now carries operational reviews, spot checks, and beneficiary feedback 
surveys. TPM findings continue to provide MoLSA with an overview of the implementation challenges and 
inform course adjustments. Third, supervision, communication, and citizen engagement tasks will be 
strengthened by adding an external third-party citizen engagement element to augment existing 
instruments. Fourth, existing GRMs will be strengthened to ensure that potential targeting and benefit 
reception challenges are detected and addressed. Finally, further layers will be added to the M&E system 
through the use of Geo-enabling for Monitoring and Supervision innovations and integrating 
implementation support review requirements in the World Bank’s portfolio-wide TPM agent. 
38. 
The fiduciary risk for the project remains high. This is largely attributable to weak and evolving 
rudimentary funds flow and banking systems particularly at the implementation level, characterized by 
potential money laundering and terrorist financing risks; inadequate public financial management and 
cash transfer management capacities at the implementing agency and community levels to spend and 
account for the funds correctly and timely; and limited access to project sites at the local level due to 
security constraints. Risk mitigation measures include strengthening beneficiary identification and 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 39 
 
enrolment processes using WFP’s SCOPE platform; strengthening existing framework agreements with 
payment service providers to facilitate payment delivery, in particular, measures to minimize liquidity 
challenges; complementing TPM arrangements with field-based monitors; and agreeing with MoLSA and 
WFP to ensure utilization of banking institutions supervised by recognized regimes. These risk mitigation 
measures will be further strengthened with the aim of strengthening country institutional capacities, 
systems, policies, and procedures, with the support of dedicated and qualified resources for procurement 
and FM at MoLSA. 
39. 
Other risks in Somalia include conflict and insecurity risks, which continue to be substantial 
across the country and high in parts of the country. The security situation limits access to project 
locations for World Bank implementation support and poses risks for frontline implementers, both 
government and UN agencies, as well as beneficiaries. In continuation of the operating modality 
established under the parent project, the proposed AF will only operate in locations where the security 
situation is not expected to create risks to successfully delivering cash assistance to poor and vulnerable 
households—a risk that is largely mitigated now using digital transfers. In addition, WFP’s role in service 
delivery provides additional insights to MoLSA via the UN system for identifying and managing security 
threats to its operations. 
IV. 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
 
A. 
Economic Analysis 
 
40. 
Somalia has a population of about 15 million, of which roughly 60 percent are nomadic and 
seminomadic pastoralists, and 60 percent live in rural areas. About 70 percent of the population live 
below the poverty line (estimated based on US$1.90 a day in 2011 purchasing power parity terms),8 and 
this figure is expected to have increased in recent years following the compounding shocks of floods, the 
COVID-19 pandemic, the desert locust plague, and the recent drought, all of which have adversely affected 
economic growth and household consumption.  
41. 
The enhanced and expanded cash transfers under the proposed AF and restructuring will help 
mitigate the impact of the multiple crises affecting Somalia, as expected from similar policy responses 
undertaken in the region. Reliance on cash transfers as effective safety nets in times of crisis has increased 
significantly in recent years, especially in response to COVID-19, in all regions of the world. Social 
assistance protects investments in human capital and productive assets. Existing literature also suggests 
that cash transfers help promote household food security in a post-disaster context through dietary 
diversity9 and reduce negative coping strategies such as self-imposed dietary restrictions, child labor and 
 
8 World Bank. 2019. Somali Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment - Findings for Wave 2 of the Somali High-Frequency Survey.  
9 Bailey, S., and K. Hedlund. 2012. The Impact of Cash Transfers on Nutrition in Emergency and Transitional Settings: A Review 
of Evidence. Overseas Development Institute.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 39 
 
dangerous work, to meet needs10 and that households receiving cash transfers experience less hunger 
compared to households that did not receive the transfer.11 
42. 
The proposed AF will protect the human capital gains of the parent project and help mitigate 
extreme poverty and hunger among the targeted beneficiaries and contribute to immediate food 
security and consumption needs. As the current drought is pushing more people into extreme poverty 
and vulnerability, the continued support to Baxnaano regular beneficiaries and the increase to further ECT 
beneficiaries is critical. Baxnaano currently covers 9 percent of the total population, and the horizontal 
and vertical expansion of cash transfers will enhance coverage to 12 percent of the country’s population 
to meet basic needs during the ongoing drought for at least six months. For the 193,000 households 
receiving shock-responsive cash transfers, the total transfer amount of US$60 monthly covers about 59 
percent of the cost of the minimum expenditure basket for urban/main markets for the month of February 
2022.12 
43. 
A detailed cost-benefit analysis is not possible at this time due to limited data availability in 
Somalia. An impact evaluation will be designed confirming the availability of resources. Given the 
overwhelming availability of global evidence, it is expected that the economic impact of the interventions 
will be significant. 
B. 
Technical 
 
44. 
The parent project addresses human capital needs from a strategic developmental perspective 
and an effective shock-responsive delivery for building resilience and addressing food insecurity. The 
Baxnaano UCT and ECT programs, financed by the parent project, would continue functioning in the same 
way under the proposed third AF. The cash transfers provided will enable households to protect and invest 
in their children’s health and education and thereby gradually build human capital. 
45. 
The proposed scale-up under this AF comprise a comprehensive set of interventions to 
strengthen resilience to current and future shocks. Extensive evidence shows that cash transfers support 
households to cope with climate-related shocks.13 More recent evidence also shows that complementary 
measures significantly contribute to building household’s resilience to future shocks, thereby producing a 
more lasting and sustainable effect in the long run in highly climate impact-prone contexts.14 This growing 
body of evidence clearly shows that high human capital improves adaptation and mitigation to climate 
change. This suggests that adaptation and mitigation that account and compensate for impacts on the 
 
10 Lehmann, C., and D. Masterson. 2014. Emergency Economies: The Impact of Cash Assistance in Lebanon; An Impact 
Evaluation of the 2013–2014 Winter Cash Assistance Program for Syrian Refugees in Lebanon. Beirut: International Rescue 
Committee.  
11 Banerjee, A., M. Faye, A. Krueger, P. Niehaus, and T. Suri. 2020. Effects of a Universal Basic Income during the Pandemic.  
12 https://www.fsnau.org/sectors/markets.  
13 Asfaw and Davis. 2018. The Impact of Cash Transfer Programs in Building Resilience: Insight from African Countries; Lawlor et 
al. 2019. Cash Transfers Enable Households to Cope with Agricultural Production and Process Shocks; Baptista et al. 2023. 
Economic Effects of Climate Change and Food Insecurity in Niger.  
14 Rigolini. 2021. Social Protection and Labor: A Key Enabler for Climate Chance Adaptation and Mitigation.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 39 
 
most vulnerable segments of the economy and population can create a virtuous cycle that leads to 
positive outcomes for both climatic action and human capital.15 
46. 
MoLSA will amend the existing contract with WFP to include Component 1 funds from the 
proposed AF and exclude the Baxnaano urban expansion. The current cohort of 200,000 households is 
already included in the project and no incremental logistical actions will be required to continue providing 
cash transfers. The population segment eligible for temporary ECT is either already pre-identified having 
been supported under the SNLRP Phase I or will be identified using the established targeting process. All 
cash transfers will continue to be made via digital transfers, for which WFP has established partnerships 
with payment service providers. For the Baxnaano urban expansion, MoLSA will engage payment service 
providers directly rather than through the UN. Payments under Component 1 are expected to continue 
on a quarterly basis to facilitate payroll preparation, disbursement, and reconciliation as well as to provide 
income predictability to households which would facilitate financial decision-making. 
47. 
Expansion of the household registration in the USR will support a strong foundation upon which 
a comprehensive national database of the poor and vulnerable would be built. Registration of an 
estimated additional 1.8 million poor and vulnerable households in the USR will mean that some 
additional 10.8 million individuals will be included in the national database, equivalent to approximately 
86 percent of the population in Somalia. The data would enable rapid mobilization of assistance in 
response to future shocks. 
48. 
MoLSA will lead coordination efforts via the Government-led Donor Working Group (GDWG). 
Given its leadership role, the government, through GDWG, will continue to play a key role in the 
coordination of the social protection sector. The World Bank will remain engaged as the co-chair of the 
GDWG which serves as a key platform for coordination across development and humanitarian agencies. 
The USR along with WFP’s SCOPE will also help coordinate targeting activities between Baxnaano and 
WFP-implemented humanitarian interventions. 
C. 
Financial Management 
 
49. 
No changes in the FM arrangements are required. The PIU is responsible for managing the 
financial flows of cash transfers to all vendors and eligible beneficiaries. MoLSA will continue to manage 
all agreed implementation, procurement, and operational requirements. The project has a record of 
timely compliance with submission of acceptable unaudited interim financial reports; however, delays in 
the audit report have been noted. There are no overdue audit reports. Given the use of country systems 
in Somalia, the proposed AF will adopt this approach in various FM aspects as is the case for the parent 
project. This will cover budgeting, accounting and reporting, and oversight arrangements with the Office 
of the Auditor General. The External Assistance Fiduciary Section (EAFS) units within the Offices of the 
Accountant General of the FGS will remain responsible for the overall FM, with the PIU continuing to carry 
out day-to-day functions under their guidance. 
50. 
The FM risks identified under the parent project are also expected to apply to the AF. 
Accordingly, the risk mitigation measures implemented under the parent project will also be applied 
under the AF with necessary adjustments to respond to any changes in scope and the evolving operating 
 
15 Caruso, Marcos, and Noy. 2022. Climate Changes Affect Human Capital. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 39 
 
context. For the Baxnaano urban expansion, MoLSA will contract third-party payment service providers 
to ensure effective delivery of the cash transfer program and accountability for the funds disbursed. A 
TPM firm will also be engaged to provide additional fiduciary oversight and confirmation of receipt of cash 
transfers by the intended beneficiaries. The World Bank will provide technical assistance for the 
development of the terms of reference (ToR) for the payment service provider to ensure that the needed 
functionality on automatic payment reconciliation and links to the MIS are included based on lessons 
learned from other similar activities. The effectiveness of the EAFS units, alongside other relevant 
functional units, will be continuously monitored while capacity-strengthening opportunities will be 
identified and supported to ensure effective FM operations. The FM arrangements were rated Moderately 
Satisfactory in the last ISR (August 2023). 
D. 
Procurement 
 
51. 
No changes in procurement management arrangements are required. The existing 
implementation arrangements of the parent project will be maintained and strengthened under the 
proposed AF. Procurement for the project will be carried out in accordance with the “World Bank 
Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers”, dated September 2023, the “Guidelines on Preventing and 
Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants”, dated 
October 15, 2006, and revised in January 2011 and as of July 1, 2016, and the provisions stipulated in the 
Financing Agreement. The Project Procurement Strategy for Development developed by the Recipient 
remains unchanged. The procurement arrangements of the project would remain unchanged; the 
procurement outlays of the AF and restructuring are eight consultancy firms’ contracts (including an 
amendment to an existing UN contract) and some goods procurements based on shopping and National 
Competitive Bidding and hiring of individual consultants. The procurement performance, as rated in the 
last ISR (August 2023), is Satisfactory. Keeping in view the current implementation arrangements, 
capacity, and procurement profile to be financed under the project, the risk is Substantial. 
E. 
Legal Operational Policies 
. . 
 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
No 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 
No 
.
 
F. 
Environmental and Social 
 
52. 
Activities under the proposed AF are expected to have moderate E&S risks and impacts given 
the magnitude, geographical spread, and quantum of anticipated risks and implementation history. Key 
social risks include: (a) selection bias leading to potential exclusion of the target population and 
particularly poor, vulnerable, and minority women and youth; (b) sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual 
harassment (SEA/SH) arising from gender norms and practices; (c) fragility and social conflicts that might 
create and/or exacerbate security risks and impacts on community health and safety; (d) systemic 
challenges arising from MoLSA’s developing capacity to identify and mitigate risks and impacts as they 
occur; and (e) risks of data privacy breaches resulting from compromised data protection and privacy 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 39 
 
protocols. Key environmental risks include risks of occupational health and safety for project workers 
resulting mainly from fragility and prevalence of security incidences and potential gaps in the proper 
handling and management of medical waste. Collectively, and given the strong track record and robust 
systems for effective implementation to date, risks and impacts are considered moderate. However, the 
residual contextual risks of operating in a conflict zone with endemic fragility and protracted conflict and 
insecurity mean complex dynamics where community consultations, oversight, and variable capacity to 
redress harm may lead to substantial risks and impacts. 
53. 
As activities and implementation arrangements under the proposed AF will remain largely 
consistent with the parent project, measures already in place to manage E&S risks and impacts will 
continue to apply with some modifications to adapt to the new activities. These include: (a) a robust 
USR-based selection criteria hardwired into the project design; (b) a detailed security risk assessment and 
management to enable the profiling and understanding of security risks thereby enabling project 
interventions in areas of relative security and safety; (c) a meticulous application of the newly enacted 
data privacy protocols; (d) adoption of the already established medical waste management protocols 
prepared under the Improving Healthcare Services in Somalia Project (“Damal Caafimaad”); and (e) 
strengthened monitoring and supervision through the inclusion of E&S considerations in the ToR for TPM 
agents. The Environmental and Social Review Summary has been prepared to detail E&S risk mitigation 
measures to be applied by the proposed AF. Community consultations have been conducted in new 
districts where new households will be targeted for Baxnaano participation. The Environmental and Social 
Commitment Plan and the Stakeholder Engagement Plan have been updated and disclosed on October 
31, 2023 on the World Bank external website and on November 4, 2023 on the Ministry of Finance 
website. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), incorporating a new Electronic 
Waste Management Plan and an updated SEA/SH Action Plan, Labor Management Procedures (LMP), and 
a Security Risk Assessment and Management Framework have been updated. The adoption and disclosure 
of respective E&S instruments in form and substance satisfactory to IDA, and recruitment of an 
environmental specialist to the PIU are effectiveness conditions of the AF. To strengthen the effective 
management of E&S risks, the project will evaluate the possibility of acquiring technical cross-support by 
an SEA/SH expert working in one of the existing PIUs. 
54. 
SEA and SH continue to be a threat to women and girls throughout Somalia as a significant 
contextual risk that may be exacerbated by project activities in the context of the ongoing drought and 
widespread needs. As families lose their livelihoods and suffer hunger and food insecurity, the 
vulnerability of women and girls to the risks of SEA increases as they seek to access project services. In 
addition, project workers, in particular female workers, may be at risk of SH by colleagues or supervisors. 
Mitigation measures that will continue to apply to address sexual and gender-based violence 
(SGBV)/SEA/SH risks include integration of codes of conduct with SGBV/SEA/SH-related protections; 
community consultations and sensitization activities to raise awareness of risks; mapping of and 
collaboration with potential service providers in the project-affected areas; development of an SGBV 
Action Plan; and strengthening of the GRM with procedures and channels to enable safe, confidential, and 
ethical reporting of SGBV/SEA/SH incidents. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 39 
 
G. 
Climate Change 
 
55. 
The proposed AF has been screened for climate change and disaster risks, and the potential 
risks to the project outcomes have been found to be moderate. Somalia is one of the most climate-
sensitive countries. It is just coming out of an extreme drought, but the current El Niño conditions are 
likely to bring more flooding, and a wider range of climate risks is anticipated. The increasingly intense 
cycle of drought and flooding experienced by Somalia is sadly familiar. The World Bank’s recent Somalia 
Climate Risk Review (published in August 2023) highlighted the impacts of recurrent extreme weather 
events and their interaction with broader patterns of social fragility. It also documented a wider range of 
current and future climate risks that affect health, livelihoods, and development potentials and the need 
for climate adaptation to decouple acute climate impacts from drivers of social fragility and climate-proof 
future development. As discussed above, Somalia is highly prone to frequent and devastating climatic 
shocks, such as floods and droughts, as well as biological shocks such as locust infestations, which 
themselves are driven by the effects of climate change. These shocks disproportionately affect poor and 
vulnerable households that have limited capacity to respond. The parent project provided predictable 
cash transfers to address the resulting chronic food insecurity. The regular transfers for Baxnaano 
beneficiaries, as well as ECT for non-Baxnaano households will enable recipients to meet urgent food 
consumption needs, mitigate climate-induced risks, and avoid harmful negative coping strategies with 
environmental impacts such as cutting down trees to make charcoal for sale, among others. Additionally, 
the project will continue efforts to address demand-side challenges of malnutrition among pregnant 
mothers and lactating mothers with children below the age of 23 months, by building direct links between 
Baxnaano and nutrition service providers. 
56. 
The establishment of a national shock-responsive social protection system with the project’s 
support will address the institutional side of resilience building to climatic shocks. The use of the distress 
index for the geographical selection of target locations incorporates climatic considerations as the 
exposure to shocks and severity of food insecurity correlates to the localized impacts of climatic events. 
Household data to be collected for household targeting includes data on climate-dependent livelihoods 
to help assess vulnerability. Populating household data in the forthcoming social registry will support rapid 
identification and categorization of beneficiaries for outreach in the event of future crises. The gradual 
use of the USR for the registration and selection of the poorest and most vulnerable households for safety 
net expansion will operationalize the system and pave the way for its future application across social 
sectors. This would enable improved beneficiary identification for other interventions, such as nutrition, 
social, and economic inclusion services, further contributing to improved resilience against climatic and 
other shocks. 
57. 
The project promotes climate adaptation by strengthening the national delivery system and 
providing economic shock-responsive cash transfers to poor and vulnerable beneficiaries. It helps build 
resilience and weather the multiple concurrent shocks affecting Somalia (including climate shocks) and is 
therefore contributing significantly to climate change adaptation (see summary of contributions by 
component in Table 3). 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 39 
 
Table 3. Mitigation and Adaptation Measures by Component 
Component 1: 
Nutrition-linked 
Unconditional Cash 
Transfers 
All proceeds of this AF will finance a scale-up to support the most poor and vulnerable 
households affected by the continuing drought crisis to protect their food security. The 
component directly enhances household resilience and reduces adverse impacts of 
shocks. In addition, the further six months support to current Baxnaano beneficiaries 
will protect gains already made in strengthening their resilience. 
Component 2: 
Delivery Systems and 
Institutional Capacity 
Building 
This component will continue as previously planned and will support important systems 
and institutional capacity to better manage beneficiary information. It will indirectly 
support climate adaptation by improving MoLSA’s capacity to manage beneficiaries 
affected by different climate-induced shocks.  
Component 3: 
Project Management, 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation, and 
Knowledge Management 
Component 3 will provide project management and operational support, including 
capacity building of project implementers and other stakeholders at the national and 
subnational levels in E&S risk management and climate change. It will also support the 
delivery of climate-sensitive outcomes of Components 1, 2, and 3, including by 
strengthening the M&E system that will help track the implementation of climate 
measures outlined in the other components. 
Component 4: 
Household Registration in 
the USR 
Component 4 will support the nationwide expansion of the USR which is linked to the 
provision of benefits and services to the households vulnerable to climatic shocks. The 
USR is an essential tool to improve coordination between different development and 
humanitarian partners to improve targeting and follow-up to households most affected 
by climate-related shocks. Its expansion is expected to significantly improve efficiency 
of targeted shock-responsive support.  
 
58. 
The project is fully aligned with the mitigation and adaptation aspects of the Paris Alignment 
Assessment. The project is aligned with Somalia’s commitment in its Nationally Determined Contribution 
(filed in July 2021) and the 2013 National Adaptation Programme of Action. 
(a) Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. The main climate and disaster risks are 
droughts, wildfires, flooding, and extreme heat events. These climate-related risks are 
considered unlikely to have a material impact on the achievement of the PDO. None of them 
is considered to have a significant risk that affects the effective implementation of the 
project activities: urban and rural shock-responsive cash transfers and delivery systems. 
Thus, the project can be considered aligned with adaptation. 
(b) Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks. The project activities are primarily meant to 
alleviate poverty and inequality by enhancing the ability of individuals and households to 
withstand shocks and improve their livelihoods. The activities undertaken to achieve these 
objectives have negligible greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and do not have a negative 
impact on Somalia’s low-GHG-emission development pathways. Hence, the project can be 
considered aligned on mitigation. 
H. 
Gender 
 
59. 
Women and girls in Somalia have been disproportionately affected by the multiple crises and 
food insecurity as they face specific challenges to social, economic, and decision-making access. 
Traditional and religious norms limit women’s roles outside the domestic sphere, thereby restricting 
participation in political and public decision-making forums. Only 43 percent of women are participating 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 39 
 
in the labor force (compared to 67 percent of men), making for one of the lowest rates across Sub-Saharan 
Africa. Despite increasing engagement in economic activities, women’s involvement in wage labor 
remains even lower (33–40 percent) and mainly concentrated in the agriculture and informal sectors. 
60. 
Further, to have any significant impact on improving women’s lives, it is essential to help them 
overcome the barriers they face in accessing health, especially as it relates to childbirth. An 
overwhelming 89 percent of the mothers did not receive any postnatal check-up in the first two days after 
childbirth and only 31 percent of women ages 15–49 who had a live birth received care from skilled 
personnel during their last delivery.16 To start improving women’s access to essential health care services, 
the nutrition-linked regular cash transfers support pregnant and lactating mothers with young children to 
enhance health, nutrition, and child cognitive development outcomes. 
61. 
The proposed AF, via the Baxnaano program, will continue to tackle these gender gaps and 
SGBV/SEA/SH risks in several ways. The program will continue to prioritize women as the direct recipient 
of the cash transfers, thereby improving their access to predictable income, closing the gap on income 
inequality, and enhancing women’s decision-making power in the household and community. Digital 
transfers would improve financial inclusion by connecting women to the broader mobile money platform, 
which can be used for other financial activities. As in the parent project, the proposed AF will ensure 
women receive their benefits through secured digital transfer arrangements including the provision of 
subscriber identification module (SIM) cards in their names. Improvements in health, nutrition, and 
education of mothers and children as well as participating women’s financial literacy are expected as 
Baxnaano will continue to link households to broader social services to support human capital 
accumulation and economic empowerment. In the medium to longer term, it is envisioned that sustained 
cash transfer support will enhance the economic inclusion of women and the overall gender equity. 
62. 
The proposed AF will provide continuity for initiatives under the parent project that help 
mitigate the risks of SGBV/SEA/SH incidents and support survivors. Cash assistance to poor and 
vulnerable households enables women and girls to avoid moving to urban areas and IDP camps during 
shocks, which is a common coping strategy during emergencies, thereby minimizing their exposure to 
SGBV/SEA/SH. However, cash transfers may also increase exposure to SGBV/SEA/SH in the short term, 
and mitigation measures such as local-level facilitation by cooperating partners, which include women 
staff, will be essential to ensure effective outreach to female beneficiaries. The GRM and TPM agency also 
include female staff to ensure female beneficiaries can voice potential concerns or complaints in a safe 
environment. Progress in closing gender gaps will be measured through gender-specific and gender-
disaggregated data in the project’s Results Framework. 
I. 
Citizen Engagement 
 
63. 
All aspects of citizen engagement established under the parent project will apply as the 
proposed AF will contribute to the Baxnaano scale-up for shock response. The existing arrangements 
governing Baxnaano implementation and the WFP contract for service delivery will continue to be in 
place. Citizen engagement channels include, among others, the local CSC, a uniform communications 
strategy, the GRM, and TPM arrangements. 
 
16 Directorate of National Statistics, Federal Government of Somalia. The Somali Health and Demographic Survey 2020. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 39 
 
64. 
The CSCs have had a positive role in presenting community priorities, and the inclusion of 
women has helped women beneficiaries in coming forward with their concerns. Further work will be 
undertaken to improve capacity, particularly in raising awareness on emerging issues and the use of 
grievance management avenues. Program-related communication involves a multipronged strategy 
comprising radio broadcasts, bulk mobile messaging, and infographic posters to deliver essential content 
such as information on beneficiary rights and entitlements and means to reach the Common Feedback 
Mechanism (CFM) and WFP’s cooperating partners. The GRM has proven effective with multiple channels, 
comprising the CFM that operates at the local level and the MoLSA-administered national call center. 
Nearly 2,858 complaints were submitted via the GRM from July 2022 to June 2023, of which 94 percent 
were addressed and closed within one month of receipt. 
65. 
Finally, TPM firms conduct operations reviews, spot checks, and beneficiary feedback surveys. 
The firms will solicit regular beneficiary feedback to provide regular insights on issues such as the types of 
expenditures made after receipt of cash transfers, compliance with standard operating procedures, 
identification of operational risks during implementation, timeliness and satisfaction with service delivery 
and payment delivery, and the quality of services provided by WFP’s cooperating partners, among others. 
These data will further enhance the project’s M&E capacity and allow for informed decision-making by 
Baxnaano implementers. 
V. 
WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS 
 
66. 
Grievance redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by 
a project supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance 
mechanisms or the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are 
promptly reviewed in order to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and 
individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The 
AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of 
Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides 
communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute resolution. 
Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the 
attention of Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For 
information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), please visit 
http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s 
Accountability Mechanism, please visit https://accountability.worldbank.org. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 39 
 
 
      
 
VI    SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES 
 
 
Changed 
Not Changed 
Results Framework 
  ✔ 
   
Components and Cost 
  ✔ 
   
Loan Closing Date(s) 
  ✔ 
   
Reallocation between Disbursement Categories 
  ✔ 
   
Disbursements Arrangements 
  ✔ 
   
Implementing Agency 
     
✔ 
Project's Development Objectives 
     
✔ 
Cancellations Proposed 
     
✔ 
Legal Covenants 
     
✔ 
Institutional Arrangements 
     
✔ 
Financial Management 
     
✔ 
Procurement 
     
✔ 
Other Change(s) 
     
✔ 
 
 
VII   DETAILED CHANGE(S) 
   
COMPONENTS 
Current Component Name 
Current Cost 
(US$, millions) 
Action 
Proposed Component 
Name 
Proposed Cost (US$, 
millions) 
Nutrition-linked 
Unconditional Cash 
Transfers 
299.00 Revised 
Nutrition-linked 
Unconditional Cash 
Transfers 
359.00 
Delivery Systems and 
Institutional Capacity 
Building 
6.00 No Change 
Delivery Systems and 
Institutional Capacity 
Building 
6.00 
Project Management, 
Monitoring and Evaluation, 
and Knowledge 
Management 
8.00 Revised 
Project Management, 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation, and 
Knowledge 
21.00 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 39 
 
Management 
Household Registration in 
the Unified Social Registry 
5.00 Revised 
Household Registration 
in the Unified Social 
Registry 
32.00 
TOTAL 
 318.00  
 
 418.00 
 
 
LOAN CLOSING DATE(S) 
Ln/Cr/Tf 
Status 
Original Closing 
 
Current 
Closing(s)  
 
Proposed  
Closing  
 
Proposed Deadline 
for Withdrawal 
Applications 
IDA-D5100 
Effective 
31-Aug-2022 
31-Dec-2024 
31-Dec-2025 
30-Apr-2026 
IDA-D8560 
Effective 
31-Aug-2023 
31-Dec-2024 
31-Dec-2025 
30-Apr-2026 
IDA-E0770 
Effective 
31-Dec-2024 
31-Dec-2024 
31-Dec-2025 
30-Apr-2026 
   
REALLOCATION BETWEEN DISBURSEMENT CATEGORIES 
Current Allocation 
Actuals + Committed 
Proposed Allocation 
Financing % 
(Type Total) 
 
 
 
Current 
Proposed 
 REALLOCATION NEW 
 
IDA-D5100-001    |    Currency: XDR 
 
iLap Category Sequence No: 1 
Current Expenditure Category: Cash Transfer prt A.1 
34,070,400.00 
34,415,792.44 
34,415,792.44 
100.00 
100.00 
 
iLap Category Sequence No: 2 
Current Expenditure Category: Gds, NCS, CS prt A.2 
4,089,600.00 
3,479,083.47 
3,479,083.47 
100.00 
100.00 
 
iLap Category Sequence No: 3 
Current Expenditure Category: Gds, NCS, CS prt B 
4,320,000.00 
4,589,247.63 
4,589,247.63 
100.00 
100.00 
 
iLap Category Sequence No: 4 
Current Expenditure Category: Gds NCS CS OC TR prt C 
4,320,000.00 
1,661,557.11 
4,315,876.46 
100.00 
100.00 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 39 
 
Total 
46,800,000.00
44,145,680.65 
46,800,000.00 
 
 
 
IDA-D8560-001    |    Currency: XDR 
 
iLap Category Sequence No: 1 
Current Expenditure Category: Cash Transfer prt A.1 
66,240,910.00 
67,084,795.87 
67,084,795.87 
100.00 
100.00 
 
iLap Category Sequence No: 2 
Current Expenditure Category: Gds, Wks, NCS, CS prt A.2 
9,064,550.00 
4,815,190.28 
4,815,190.28 
100.00 
100.00 
 
iLap Category Sequence No: 3 
Current Expenditure Category: Gds, NCS, CS, OC, Tr prt C 
1,394,540.00 
1,386,463.52 
4,800,013.85 
100.00 
100.00 
Total 
76,700,000.00
95,708,963.29 
76,700,000.00 
 
 
 
IDA-E0770-001    |    Currency: XDR 
 
iLap Category Sequence No: 1 
Current Expenditure Category: Csh trf ptA.1; Emerg csh trf  ptA.3 
90,030,000.00 
 0.00 
63,570,847.00 
100.00 
100.00 
 
iLap Category Sequence No: 2 
Current Expenditure Category: Gds, Wks, N/CS pt A.2 pt D 
16,370,000.00 
 0.00 
8,668,752.00 
100.00 
100.00 
 
iLap Category Sequence No:  
Current Expenditure Category: Gds, NCS, CS, OC, Tr prt C 
 0.00 
 0.00 
34,160,401.00 
 
100.00 
Total 
106,400,000.00
 0.00 
106,400,000.00 
 
 
 
DISBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENTS 
Change in Disbursement Arrangements 
Yes 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 39 
 
 Expected Disbursements (in US$) 
 DISBURSTBL 
Fiscal Year 
Annual 
Cumulative 
2020 
22,168,446.00 
22,168,446.00 
2021 
29,064,582.00 
51,233,028.00 
2022 
36,146,636.94 
87,379,664.94 
2023 
72,092,531.23 
159,472,196.17 
2024 
197,008,102.45 
356,480,298.62 
2025 
44,773,843.58 
401,254,142.20 
2026 
16,745,857.80 
418,000,000.00 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
Risk Category 
Latest ISR Rating 
Current Rating 
 
Political and Governance 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
Macroeconomic 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫ Moderate 
⚫ Moderate 
 
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and 
Sustainability 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ High 
 
Fiduciary 
⚫ High 
⚫ High 
 
Environment and Social 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Moderate 
 
Stakeholders 
⚫ Moderate 
⚫ Moderate 
 
Other 
 
⚫ Substantial 
 
Overall 
⚫ Substantial 
⚫ Substantial 
 
   LEGAL COVENANTS2 
LEGAL COVENANTS – Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing 
(P181469) 
Sections and Description 
 
 
Without limitation to Section I.A above, the Recipient shall, by not later than three (3) months after the Effective 
Date of this Agreement, update the Output Agreement with WFP in a manner and substance satisfactory to the 
Association, in order to, inter alia, extend WFP’s services for the provision of Cash Transfers under the Cash 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 39 
 
Transfer Program (“CTP”) to CTP Beneficiaries under this additional financing. 
 
In furtherance of Section I.A above, the Recipient shall, within 3 months of the Effective Date: (a) amend the terms 
of reference of, and contract with, the TPM Consultant to extend the completion date; or (b) hire a new third-party 
monitoring consulting firm; and thereafter maintain such consultancy throughout the remaining period of 
implementation of the Project, all, in a manner and substance satisfactory to the Association, in order to continue 
monitoring the performance of the CTP until the new Closing Date. 
 
 
 
Conditions 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
The Recipient has recruited to the Project 
Implementation Unit, an environmental specialist, with 
qualifications, experience, and under terms of reference 
satisfactory to the Association 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
The Recipient has prepared, disclosed, consulted upon, 
and adopted the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework, Labor Management Procedures, SEA/SH 
Prevention and Response Action Plan, and Electronic 
Waste Management Plan, in form and substance 
satisfactory to the Association 
 
Type 
Financing source 
Description 
Effectiveness 
IBRD/IDA 
The Recipient has prepared and adopted the Security Risk 
Assessment Management Framework, in form and 
substance satisfactory to the Association 
 
 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 39 
 
VIII. 
RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING 
 
     
 
Results Framework 
COUNTRY: Somalia  
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing 
RESULT NO PDO 
Project Development Objective(s) 
 
The project development objective is to provide cash transfers to targeted poor and vulnerable households and establish the key building blocks of a national shock-
responsive safety net system. 
 
Project Development Objective Indicators by Objectives/ Outcomes 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
 
Provide cash transfers to targeted poor and vulnerable households (Action: This Objective has been Revised) 
Beneficiaries of social safety net programs (CRI, Number)  
0.00 
2,520,000.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Rationale:  
The change incorporates the scale-up of ECTs under this AF and incorporates adjustments made necessary due to a higher 
number of Baxnaano regular beneficiaries having required shock-responsive top-ups than initially planned. 
Beneficiaries of social safety net programs - Female (CRI, 
Number)  
0.00 
1,260,000.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Rationale:  
The change incorporates the scale-up of ECTs under this AF and incorporates adjustments made necessary due to a higher 
number of Baxnaano regular beneficiaries having required shock-responsive top-ups than initially planned. 
Establish the key building blocks of a national shock-responsive safety net system (Action: This Objective has been Revised) 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 39 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
 
National cash transfer program targeting methodology 
developed and endorsed by FGS (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
Operational design of the national Social Registry developed and 
endorsed by FGS (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
 
PDO Table SPACE 
 
Intermediate Results Indicators by Components 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
 
Component 1: Nutrition-linked Unconditional Cash Transfers  
Households receiving cash transfers (Number)  
0.00 
420,000.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Rationale:  
The change incorporates the scale-up of ECTs under this AF and incorporates adjustments made necessary due to a higher 
number of Baxnaano regular beneficiaries having required shock-.responsive top-ups than initially planned. 
Households receiving shock-responsive benefits to cope with 
an adverse climatic event (Number)  
0.00 
408,000.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Rationale:  
The change incorporates the scale-up of ECTs under this AF. 
Women directly receiving cash transfers (Percentage)  
0.00 
85.00 
Women who benefited from the nutrition services (Percentage)  
0.00 
25.00 
Children under 5 years of age who benefitted from the nutrition 
program (Percentage)  
0.00 
25.00 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 of 39 
 
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO 
 
 
 
Indicator Name 
PBC 
Baseline 
End Target 
 
 
 
 
Beneficiaries receiving cash transfer payments within the 
timeframe specified in the Operations Manual (Percentage)  
0.00 
90.00 
Registered grievances that are addressed within the timeframe 
specified in the Operations Manual (Percentage)  
0.00 
85.00 
Component 2: Delivery Systems and Institutional Capacity Building  
Social protection policy framework and medium-term strategic 
roadmap developed and endorsed (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
Government-led Social Protection Working Group established 
and functional (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
Cash Transfer payment delivery system design prepared and 
endorsed (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
National Cash Transfer MIS system developed (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
National Cash Transfer GRM developed and endorsed (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Management  
Design of a pilot intervention for youth-targeted productive 
safety net is prepared (Yes/No)  
No 
Yes 
Household Registration in the Unified Social Registry  
Households registered in the USR (Number)  
0.00 
2,000,000.00 
Action: This indicator has been Revised  
Rationale:  
The change incorporates the nationwide expansion of the USR survey. 
 
IO Table SPACE 
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 of 39 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators Mapped 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Beneficiaries of social safety net programs  
Quarterly 
 
WFP SCOPE 
 
MIS reports 
 
MoLSA and WFP 
 
Beneficiaries of social safety net 
programs - Female 
 
Quarterly 
 
WFP SCOPE 
 
MIS generated reports 
 
MoLSA and WFP 
 
National cash transfer program targeting 
methodology developed and endorsed by 
FGS 
 
Once 
 
Official letter 
from MoLSA 
confirming 
endorsement 
 
MoLSA PIU informs the 
World Bank 
 
MoLSA 
 
Operational design of the national Social 
Registry developed and endorsed by FGS 
Operational design of a 
national social registry to 
include a database of poor 
households that can be 
targeted for safety net and 
other assistance in times of 
climate and other 
emergencies. 
Once 
 
Official letter 
from MoLSA 
confirming 
endorsement 
 
MoLSA PIU informs the 
World Bank 
 
MoLSA 
 
 
ME PDO Table SPACE 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators  Mapped 
Indicator Name 
Definition/Description 
Frequency 
Datasource 
Methodology for Data 
Collection 
Responsibility for Data 
Collection 
Households receiving cash transfers 
 
Quarterly 
 
WFP SCOPE 
 
Program specific MIS 
 
MoLSA and WFP 
 
Households receiving shock-
responsive benefits to cope with an 
adverse climatic event 
Baxnaano households 
receiving shock-responsive 
benefits (i.e. vertical 
Quarterly 
 
WFP SCOPE 
 
Program specific MIS 
 
MoLSA and WFP 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 of 39 
 
program expansion) and 
non-Baxnaano households 
receiving ECT (i.e. 
horizontal program 
expansion) specifically in 
response to the prevailing 
drought crisis. 
Women directly receiving cash transfers 
Baxnaano households with 
mothers and/or female 
caregivers as mobile 
money accountholders and 
thus direct cash recipients, 
and non-Baxnaano 
households where a female 
member is the direct 
recipient. 
Quarterly 
 
WFP SCOPE 
 
Program specific MIS 
 
MoLSA and WFP 
 
Women who benefited from the nutrition 
services 
 
Quarterly 
 
WFP SCOPE 
 
Program specific MIS 
 
MoLSA and WFP 
 
Children under 5 years of age who 
benefitted from the nutrition program 
 
Quarterly 
 
WFP SCOPE 
 
Program specific MIS 
 
MoLSA and World Bank 
 
Beneficiaries receiving cash transfer 
payments within the timeframe specified 
in the Operations Manual 
 
Quarterly 
 
TPM 
 
Program specific MIS; 
TPM quarterly data 
collection 
 
MoLSA, WFP and TPM 
 
Registered grievances that are addressed 
within the timeframe specified in the 
Operations Manual 
Indicative of performance 
of citizen engagement. 
Quarterly 
 
TPM 
 
Program specific MIS, 
TPM quarterly data 
collection 
 
MoLSA, WFP & TPM 
 
Social protection policy framework and 
medium-term strategic roadmap 
developed and endorsed 
 
Once 
 
MoLSA 
Progress 
Reports 
 
MoLSA PIU informs the 
World Bank 
 
MoLSA 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 38 of 39 
 
Government-led Social Protection 
Working Group established and functional  
Once 
 
MoLSA 
Progress 
Reports 
 
MoLSA PIU informs the 
World Bank 
 
MoLSA 
 
Cash Transfer payment delivery system 
design prepared and endorsed 
 
Once 
 
MoLSA 
Progress 
Reports; 
Supervision 
Missions 
 
MoLSA PIU informs the 
World Bank 
 
MoLSA 
 
National Cash Transfer MIS system 
developed 
 
Once 
 
MoLSA 
Progress 
Reports; 
Supervision 
Missions 
 
MoLSA PIU informs the 
World Bank 
 
MoLSA 
 
National Cash Transfer GRM developed 
and endorsed 
 
Once 
 
MoLSA 
Progress 
Reports; 
Supervision 
Missions 
 
MoLSA PIU informs the 
World Bank 
 
MoLSA 
 
Design of a pilot intervention for youth-
targeted productive safety net is prepared 
In Progress 
 
Once 
 
Design 
proposal 
available and 
shared 
 
Six-Monthly report from 
Baxnaano 
 
MoLSA 
 
Households registered in the USR 
 
Quarterly 
 
USR 
 
Program specific MIS 
 
MoLSA and WFP 
 
 
ME IO Table SPACE 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 39 of 39 
 
 
 
 
  
 
The World Bank 
Somalia Shock Responsive Safety Net for Human Capital Project Third Additional Financing (P181469) 
 
 
 
 
