 
 
 
  
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
Report No: PAD00136  
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION  
 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT  
ON  
A PROPOSED GRANT IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 38.1 MILLION (US$50 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
TO THE COMMON MARKET FOR EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA 
 
A PROPOSED CREDIT IN THE AMOUNT OF US$200 MILLION 
AND A SHORTER MATURITY LOAN IN THE AMOUNT OF US$100 MILLION  
TO THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA 
 
A PROPOSED GRANT IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 28.9 MILLION (US$38 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
TO THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE 
 
A PROPOSED GRANT IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 76.1 MILLION (US$100 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
TO THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA  
 
A PROPOSED CREDIT IN THE AMOUNT OF US$300 MILLION  
TO THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA 
 
A PROPOSED CREDIT IN THE AMOUNT OF US$25 MILLION AND  
A PROPOSED CREDIT FROM THE SCALE UP WINDOW IN THE AMOUNT OF US$250 MILLION  
TO THE TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
FOR AN 
ACCELERATING SUSTAINABLE & CLEAN ENERGY ACCESS TRANSFORMATION PROGRAM 
 USING THE MULTI-PHASE PROGRAMMATIC APPROACH  
WITH AN OVERALL FINANCING ENVELOPE OF US$5 BILLION  
 
November 8, 2023 
 
 
Energy & Extractives 
Eastern And Southern Africa 
 
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official 
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
 
(Exchange Rate Effective Oct 31, 2023) 
 
Currency Unit =   US$ 
US$ 1 = SDR 0.76 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
January 1–December 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President: Victoria Kwakwa 
Regional Director: Wendy E. Hughes 
Country Director: Boutheina Guermazi 
Practice Manager: Erik Magnus Fernstrom 
Task Team Leaders: Dana Rysankova, Monali Ranade, Zubair K.M. Sadeque  
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
AfDB 
African Development Bank 
AFE 
Eastern and Southern Africa 
AIIB 
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank 
AM 
Accountability Mechanism 
APA 
Alternative Procurement Arrangements  
ASCENT 
Accelerating Sustainable and Clean Energy Access Transformation 
BAU 
Business-as-Usual 
BC 
Black Carbon 
BGAP 
Beyond the Grid Access Program 
BRD 
Development Bank of Rwanda 
C&I 
Commercial and Industrial 
CAPEX  
Capital Expenditure 
CCPT 
Clean Cooking Planning Tool  
CERC 
Contingent Emergency Response Component  
CO2e 
Carbon Dioxide Equivalent 
COMESA 
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa 
COSS  
Cost of Service Study 
COVID-19  
Coronavirus Disease 2019  
CPF 
Country Partnership Framework 
DARES 
Distributed Access through Renewable Energy Scale-Up  
DFI 
Development Finance Institution  
DLI 
Disbursement Linked Indicators 
D-MRV 
Digital Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification 
DPO 
Development Policy Operations 
DRC 
Democratic Republic of Congo  
DRE 
Distributed Renewable Energy  
E&S 
Environmental and Social (risks) 
EAFS 
External Assistance Fiduciary Section 
EAPP 
Eastern Africa Power Pool 
EAQIP 
Energy Access and Quality Improvement Project  
EDCL 
Energy Development Corporation Limited  
EIRR  
Economic Internal Rate of Return  
ENEE 
Somalia National Electric Corporation 
ER 
Emission Reduction 
ESF  
Environmental and Social Framework  
ESI 
Electricity Supply Industry 
ESMAP 
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program 
ESMS 
Environmental and Social Management System 
ESP 
Energy Service Provider 
ESRS 
Environmental and Social Review Summary 
EUCL 
Energy Utility Corporation Limited  
EWURA 
Energy and Water Utilities Regulatory Authority 
FCV 
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 
FGS 
Federal Government of Somalia 
FHH 
Female-Headed Household 
FI 
Financial Intermediary 
FIRR  
Financial Internal Rate of Return  
FM 
Financial Management  
FY 
Fiscal Year 
 
 
GBV  
Gender-Based Violence  
GCF 
Green Climate Fund 
GDI 
Gender Development Index 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product  
GEAPP 
Global Energy Alliance for People and Planet 
GHG  
Greenhouse Gas 
GNI 
Gross National Income 
GRS 
Grievance Redress Service 
GWh 
Gigawatt Hour 
HEIS 
Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support  
HV 
High Voltage 
IBRD 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
IDA  
International Development Association 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
IPF 
Investment Project Financing 
IPP 
Independent Power Producer 
KfW 
German State-owned Development Bank 
kW 
Kilowatt 
kWh 
Kilowatt hour 
LCPDP 
Least Cost Power Development Plan  
LPG  
Liquefied Petroleum Gas  
LV 
Low Voltage 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation  
MFI 
Microfinance Institution 
MIGA 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
MPA 
Multiphase Programmatic Approach  
MSME 
Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise 
MTF 
Multi-Tier Framework  
MV 
Medium Voltage 
MW 
Megawatt 
NBR 
National Bank of Rwanda 
NDC 
Nationally Determined Contribution 
NGAP 
National Grid Alleviation Program 
NPV 
Net Present Value 
NST 
National Strategy for Transformation 
ODA 
Official Development Assistance 
OGS 
Off-Grid Solar  
OHS 
Occupational Health and Safety 
PAD  
Project Appraisal Document  
PAYG 
Pay-As-You-Go 
PCU 
Project Coordination Unit 
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
PFI 
Participating Financial Institutions 
PforR 
Program for Results  
PHRD 
Policy and Human Resources Development (fund) 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PPA 
Power Purchase Agreement 
PrDO 
Program Development Objective 
PUE 
Productive Use of Energy 
PV 
Photovoltaic 
RBF 
Results-Based Financing  
 
 
REAFF 
Regional Energy Access Financing Facility 
REF 
Renewable Energy Fund 
REG 
Rwanda Energy Group  
REIF 
Renewable Energy Investment Facility 
REMP 
Rural Energy Master Plan 
RGAP 
Rural Grid Access Program 
RIFF 
Regional Infrastructure Finance Facility  
RISE 
Regulatory Indicators for Sustainable Energy 
SAPP 
Southern Africa Power Pool 
SDG 
Sustainable Development Goal 
SDR 
Special Drawing Rights 
SEforAll 
Sustainable Energy for All 
SHS 
Solar Home System 
SME 
Small and Medium Enterprise 
SOP 
Series of Projects  
SRMI 
Sustainable Renewables Risk Mitigation Initiative 
STP 
Sao Tome and Principe 
TDB 
Trade and Development Bank 
TDF 
Trade and Development Fund  
TREEP 
Tanzania Rural Electrification Expansion Program 
USD 
United States Dollar  
VAT 
Value-Added Tax 
WB 
World Bank 
WBG 
World Bank Group 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
DATASHEET....................................................................................................................................... 1 
I. 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................................8 
B.  Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ............................................................................................ 14 
C. Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) ................................................................................... 16 
III. PROJECT DESCRIPTION ............................................................................................................. 21 
A. Program Components ..................................................................................................................... 21 
B. Project Beneficiaries ....................................................................................................................... 23 
C. Rationale for Bank Involvement and the Role of Partners ............................................................. 23 
D. Lessons Learned .............................................................................................................................. 24 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ........................................................................................ 25 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ........................................................................... 25 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements ......................................................................... 25 
C. Sustainability ................................................................................................................................... 26 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ............................................................................................... 27 
A. Technical, Economic, and Financial Analysis .................................................................................. 27 
B. Fiduciary .......................................................................................................................................... 30 
C. Legal Operational Policies ............................................................................................................... 30 
D. Environmental and Social ............................................................................................................... 30 
V. 
GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES ................................................................................................. 32 
VI. KEY RISKS ................................................................................................................................ 33 
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ............................................................................... 34 
ANNEX 1: ASCENT MPA Implementation Plan ................................................................................... 42 
ANNEX 2: COMESA Regional Energy Access Acceleration Platform (P180547) .................................... 43 
ANNEX 3: Rwanda (P180575) ............................................................................................................ 49 
DATASHEET..................................................................................................................................... 49 
ANNEX 4: Sao Tome and Principe (P177099) ..................................................................................... 62 
DATASHEET..................................................................................................................................... 62 
ANNEX 5: Somalia (P181341) ............................................................................................................ 75 
ANNEX 6: Tanzania (P179631) .......................................................................................................... 87 
ANNEX 7: TDB Regional Financing Facility (P181328) ......................................................................... 98 
ANNEX 8: ASCENT Private Sector Mobilization Approach for DRE and Clean Cooking ....................... 112 
ANNEX 9: Description of Knowledge Compact on Energy Access for Economic Transformation ........ 117 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate 
DATASHEET 
BASIC INFORMATION 
Project 
Beneficiary(ies) 
Operation Name 
EASTERN AND 
SOUTHERN AFRICA 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program Using the Multiphase 
Programmatic Approach 
Operation ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental and Social Risk 
Classification 
 
P180547 
Investment Project 
Financing (IPF) 
Substantial 
 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padmpaprocessing#doctemplate 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[✓] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[✓] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[✓] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[  ] Conflict 
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
Expected Program Closing Date 
04-Dec-2023 
31-Dec-2030 
31-Dec-2030 
Bank/IFC Collaboration 
Joint Level 
Yes 
Complementary or Interdependent project requiring active coordination 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padmpa#doctemplate 
MPA Program Development Objective 
To increase access to sustainable and clean energy in Eastern and Southern Africa 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
2 
 
MPA FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
MPA Program Financing Envelope 
5,415.00 
Components 
Component Name 
Cost (US$) 
Digital Monitoring, Reporting and Verification for Energy Access & Climate 
Finance 
5,000,000.00 
Project Preparation Facility 
20,000,000.00 
Advisory support Facility 
15,000,000.00 
Knowledge, Skills and Consumer Engagement 
5,000,000.00 
Project management and capacity building support to COMESA Secretariat 
5,000,000.00 
Organizations 
Borrower:  
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) 
Implementing Agency:  
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) Secretariat 
MPA FINANCING DETAILS (US$, Millions) 
MPA Financing Envelope: 
5,415.00 
of which Bank Financing (IBRD): 
0.00 
of which Bank Financing (IDA): 
5,000.00 
of which Other Financing sources: 
415.00 
 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
Maximizing Finance for Development 
Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?  
Yes 
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)? 
Yes 
 
SUMMARY 
Total Operation Cost 
50.00  
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
3 
 
Total Financing 
50.00  
of which IBRD/IDA 
50.00 
Financing Gap 
0.00  
DETAILS 
World Bank Group Financing 
   
International Development Association (IDA) 
50.00 
IDA Grant 
50.00 
IDA Resources (US$, Millions) 
  
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
SML Amount 
Guarantee 
Amount 
Total Amount 
Regional 
0.00 
50.00 
0.00 
0.00 
50.00 
Total 
0.00 
50.00 
0.00 
0.00 
50.00 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate 
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions) 
WB Fiscal 
Year 
2024 
2025 
2026 
2027 
2028 
2029 
2030 
2031 
Annual 
2.00 
12.00 
18.00 
8.00 
5.00 
2.00 
2.00 
1.00 
Cumulativ
e 
2.00 
14.00 
32.00 
40.00 
45.00 
47.00 
49.00 
50.00 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate 
PRACTICE AREA(S) 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Energy & Extractives 
Climate Change; Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation 
CLIMATE 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
4 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT) 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
⚫   Moderate 
2. Macroeconomic 
⚫   Moderate 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
⚫   Moderate 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
⚫   Moderate 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
⚫   Moderate 
6. Fiduciary 
⚫   Moderate 
7. Environment and Social 
⚫   Substantial 
8. Stakeholders 
⚫   Moderate 
9. Overall 
⚫   Moderate 
Overall MPA Program Risk 
⚫   Moderate 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate 
POLICY COMPLIANCE 
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?  
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL 
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
5 
 
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and 
Impacts 
Relevant 
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Relevant 
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Relevant 
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved 
Traditional Local Communities 
Relevant 
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage 
Relevant 
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate 
LEGAL 
Legal Covenants 
Sections and Description 
Section I.A.2(b) of Schedule 2. The Recipient shall not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the Effective Date 
of this Agreement, or (i) one hundred eighty 180 (180) days after the Effective Date of STP Financing Agreement, or (ii) 
one hundred eighty (180) days after the Effective Date of Tanzania Financing Agreement (in each case, whichever shall 
be the later date), establish a memorandum of understanding with STP, and Tanzania, respectively, outlining the 
collaboration and coordination arrangements, satisfactory to the Association, that will enable either STP, or Tanzania 
(as the case may be) to participate in the regional energy access acceleration platform on the same terms as the 
Recipient’s member states. To this end, it is understood that execution of such memorandum of understanding, in each 
case, is subject to: (i) the intention of either Tanzania, or STP to enter into said memorandum of understanding with the 
Recipient; and (ii) fulfilment by: (A) Tanzania of similar obligation under the Tanzania Financing Agreement, or (B) STP of 
similar obligation under the STP Financing Agreement. 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate 
Conditions 
Type 
Citation 
Description 
Financing Source 
Effectiveness 
Section V. 5.01(a) 
The Recipient has prepared 
and adopted the Project 
Operations Manual, in form 
IBRD/IDA 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
6 
 
and substance satisfactory 
to the Association. 
Effectiveness 
Section V. 5.01(b) 
The Recipient has hired to 
the Project Implementation 
Unit, an environmental 
expert, a social expert, and 
a stakeholder 
engagement/communicatio
n expert, all with 
experience, qualifications 
and terms of reference, 
satisfactory to the 
Association. 
IBRD/IDA 
Effectiveness 
Section V. 5.01(c) 
The Recipient has, 
consistent with the 
requirements of ESS 10, 
prepared, disclosed, 
consulted upon, and 
adopted the Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan and 
Labor Management 
Procedures, in form and 
substance satisfactory to 
the Association. 
IBRD/IDA 
Effectiveness 
Section V. 5.01(d) 
The Recipient has 
established the grievance 
mechanism for the Project, 
in form and substance 
satisfactory to the 
Association. 
IBRD/IDA 
Disbursement 
Section III.B.1 of Schedule 2 
No withdrawal shall be 
made under Category (2) 
unless and until the 
Recipient has: (i) hired a 
PPF consultant with 
environmental health and 
safety expertise and other 
qualifications, experience, 
and terms of reference, 
satisfactory to the 
Association; (ii) designed 
the Project Preparation 
Facility consistent with the 
IBRD/IDA 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
7 
 
requirements of ESS1, and 
(B) issued procedures, 
acceptable to the 
Association to embed 
environmental and social 
health safety requirements 
(ESHS) in advisory services 
provided, all in form and 
substance satisfactory to 
the Association; and (ii) 
included in its planning of 
the technical assistance 
under the Project, 
adequate assessment of 
environmental and social 
implications, and has 
provided in such planning 
the advice for addressing 
such implication under the 
technical assistance 
consistent with the 
requirements of the ESF. 
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
8 
 
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
1. 
Achieving the vision of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity on a livable planet by fostering 
sustainable, resilient, and inclusive development is predicated on ensuring access to sustainable and clean energy. 
Electricity is at the foundation of the modern economy and societies. Access to electricity is essential to create and 
maintain human capital development, reduce income and gender inequality, promote inclusion, and create new economic 
opportunities and jobs. Electricity is key to saving lives and building resilience in communities to pandemics, adverse 
weather events, and multitude of economic crises the world is witnessing. Access to clean energy, including cooking, 
drastically reduces indoor air pollution, saving lives and productivity, especially of women. The digital divide can be bridged 
only if electricity is available. Electricity allows children to access online education; families and businesses to access 
information and diversify sources of livelihoods; and countries to provide services to all their citizens. The global clean-
energy transition cannot be accomplished if large populations are left reliant on traditional, polluting lighting and cooking 
methods, which are harmful to their health, the local environment, and climate. 
2. 
The Accelerating Sustainable and Clean Energy Access Transformation (ASCENT) Program is an ambitious leap 
toward universal energy access and the clean energy transition in the Eastern and Southern Africa (AFE) region, home 
to 656 million people. ASCENT presents a programmatic framework for the World Bank to support acceleration of access 
to electricity in AFE, which utilizes the Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) with a proposed IDA financing envelope 
of US$5 billion. The first wave of the MPA phases, presented in this Project Appraisal Document (PAD), with a total IDA 
financing of US$1,063 million, includes five Investment Project Financing (IPF) operations, covering Phase 1 (ASCENT 
COMESA Regional Acceleration Platform, P180547), Phase 2 (ASCENT Rwanda, P180575), Phase 3 (ASCENT Sao Tome and 
Principe, P177099), Phase 4 (ASCENT Somalia, P181341), and Phase 6 (ASCENT Regional Energy Access Financing Platform 
implemented by the Trade and Development Bank) and one Program-for-Results (PforR) operation under Phase 5 (ASCENT 
Tanzania, P179631).  Annex 1 provides an overview of the current and future phases; Annexes 2-7 summarize the six 
operations under the first wave; Annex 8 summarizes ASCENT’s private-sector engagement approach; and Annex 9 
provides an overview of the research agenda supporting the program implementation.  
3. 
Over the next seven years, the ASCENT Program will provide life-transforming opportunities for 100 million 
people across up to 20 countries. It will bring together global and local knowledge, with a menu-based approach for 
empowering countries to pursue their national energy-access visions, while leveraging regional integration opportunities 
and global knowledge. The Program intends to align the comparative advantage of all parts of the World Bank (IDA, IFC, 
and MIGA) and build on the IDA financing envelope of US$5 billion to leverage US$10 billion from public and private 
financing through partnerships. The ASCENT MPA embodies the vision of the World Bank Evolution and will be an essential 
part of the proposed Global Challenge Program (GCP) on Energy Transition and Access (ETA). This Program Appraisal 
Document (PAD) describes the overall Program, including the countries and regional platforms that are joining its first 
wave.   
A. Regional and sector context  
4. 
The AFE region’s steady progress of past decades in ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity on 
a livable planet has been upended by a series of global shocks. The region’s recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic has 
been disrupted by food shortages, soaring energy prices, and global and regional macroeconomic turbulence. Impacts 
have been exacerbated by adverse climate events hammering the region, including the worst drought in the last four 
decades and the longest-lasting tropical cyclone ever recorded in the Southern Hemisphere.   
5. 
Lack of energy access hinders the AFE region’s economic recovery, resilience, and faster progress toward 
poverty reduction. Only 48 percent of the overall AFE population—and just 26 percent in rural areas—has access to 
electricity. More than one-third of all food production is lost to spoilage on the way to market owing, in large part, to lack 
of refrigeration. Less than half of all hospitals in the region have reliable electricity access, and nearly a third of all 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
9 
 
healthcare facilities are without any electricity access. It is rare for schools in rural areas to have electricity service. 
Moreover, four-fifths of all people in the AFE region lack access to clean cooking technologies and fuels; the Energy Sector 
Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) estimates the cost of inaction in terms of the health, gender, and climate 
impacts at US$169 billion per year. The ambitious regional integration agenda is also undermined by lack of electricity 
access, which limits the volume of electricity trade across countries, as well as broader integration opportunities. The AFE 
region’s progress on energy access is uneven across countries (Figure 1), between urban and rural areas, across income 
quintiles, and by gender. A Technical Note with detailed analysis and references on energy access situation in the region 
is available on request.  
Figure 1: Electricity and Clean Cooking Access in AFE 
 
Source: IEA, IRENA, WHO, World Bank. Tracking SDG 7: The Energy Progress Report (2023). 
6. 
Lack of access is constraining inclusion, social resilience and perpetuating gender inequalities. With electricity 
access deficit concentrated in the two bottom income quintiles, lack of energy access is threatening to exacerbate 
inequalities and undermine resilience for the most vulnerable populations, including women. Women in the energy sector 
play a significant role as users, entrepreneurs, employers, employees, and decision makers; however, they face 
discrimination and other barriers that limit their potential contributions to the energy sector. At the household level, 
women in the AFE Africa region are the primary users and producers of energy, but the sources of energy for most rural 
households are more likely to be unclean biomass and fossil fuels. Traditionally, women in Africa are more likely to be 
assigned the role of searching for cooking fuels and water, resulting in working longer hours to complete household chores 
and caregiver roles, which, in turn, inhibits women from pursuing economic empowerment activities. Furthermore, 
women are underrepresented in the energy sector as entrepreneurs and energy service providers, as well as in 
employment, especially those requiring science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) backgrounds.   
7. 
Half of the AFE population without electricity access resides in countries affected by fragility, conflict, and 
violence (FCV), where the lack of energy access is both the consequence and the cause of fragility and conflict. Energy 
access progress in FCV countries is falling behind non-FCV countries, affected by lack of security, as well as institutional 
weaknesses and capacity constraints typically associated with FCV contexts. In addition, an increasing number of forcibly 
displaced persons and their host communities are in urgent need of improved energy access to reduce their vulnerabilities. 
Women and girls would benefit from energy access in order to lower their exposure to gender-based violence, for 
example, by increasing overall safety with street lighting and reducing the need to spend long hours collecting wood fuels 
in unsafe environments.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
10 
 
8. 
With 365 million people without electricity and 558 million without clean cooking, the AFE region accounts for 
over half of the world’s unelectrified population and nearly a quarter of its people without clean cooking access. 
Accelerating progress on energy access is thus essential to unlocking the region’s potential to deliver on its development 
goals and help the world achieve Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 7 and related SDGs, addressing such global 
challenges such as climate change, resilience, and fragility. However, based on the AFE countries’ current pace of 
electrification, which is only marginally exceeding population growth, one can expect that more than 300 million people 
in the region will remain without electricity in 2030. 
9. 
The emerging innovations, as well as the rising political commitment and home-grown know-how for energy 
access, offer unprecedented opportunities to overcome past challenges: 
a) The rise of distributed renewable energy (DRE) technologies and business models provide acceleration and 
inclusion opportunities that were not available to countries that electrified in the last decade. Technology 
developments resulting in falling costs of solar energy and battery storage, increased energy efficiency, and smart 
digital applications have made modular DRE an increasingly attractive complement to centralized grid systems, 
giving rise to innovative, private sector–driven business models. This has revolutionized energy access in the vast 
continent of Sub-Saharan Africa, where traditional grid expansion would not be economically viable in many 
sparsely populated, low-income areas, and in FCV contexts. With cost-competitive, consumer-centered models 
and consumer financing options, the (mostly) start-up DRE companies have brought much needed innovation to 
the energy access space, otherwise dominated by state-owned utilities. DREs, which ESMAP estimates to serve 
100 million people in Sub-Saharan Africa today, are projected to be the least-cost technology for half of all 
unelectrified households in the AFE region. They also provide significant opportunities for generating jobs across 
their value chains, especially in rural areas and for women and youth; for example, the share of women employed 
in DRE is twice as high as that in the overall energy sector and about 40 percent of their workforce is formed by 
young people. 
b) Digital platforms and tools are transforming energy access delivery and financing. Digital tools, satellite imagery, 
smart/predictive algorithms, and applications of artificial intelligence have already transformed the electrification 
planning landscape and are promising a similar transformation in energy-access delivery and finance mobilization. 
Digital monitoring, reporting and verification (D-MRV) platforms can connect users all the way to their funders, 
promising efficiencies and transparency in public-sector financing flows (e.g., result-based payments and targeted 
pro-poor subsidies), while, at the same time, creating unprecedented opportunities to mobilize carbon revenues 
and other impact-based financing via aggregation, credible verification protocols, and reduction of transaction 
costs.   
c) Clean cooking is gaining momentum, driven by fast-paced innovation, increasing political commitment, and 
synergies with the electricity sector. Innovations, including electric cooking with energy-efficient stoves and 
appliances (e-Cooking), pay-as-you-go (PAYG) business models, and the opportunity to leverage carbon and 
impact-financing to pay for public goods, are making clean cooking solutions affordable to increasingly wider 
segments of the African population.  
d) Regional integration approaches can amplify the above opportunities. Regional integration can align electricity 
access and electricity trade agendas. Rising consumption from newly electrified users will boost regional trade, 
while also achieving more equitable distribution of regional trade benefits across urban and rural areas and 
income quintiles. Regionwide scale-up of energy-access investments will create incentives for localized 
manufacturing and assembly of key products and components, increasing value added for the region and further 
opportunities for regional trade. Building larger regional markets for DRE is essential for unlocking economies of 
scale and reducing cost in DRE provision, a prerequisite to mobilizing private capital at scale. Cross-border 
electrification can reduce costs and advance access in border areas. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
11 
 
10. 
Most countries in the AFE region have elevated universal energy access to a top priority. The region hosts the 
world’s fastest electrifying countries (e.g., Kenya and Rwanda) and is the global leader in off-grid electrification, with such 
home-grown innovations as PAYG business models, which have revolutionized the provision of energy access around the 
world. It is a repository of successful approaches (e.g., fast-paced grid densification in Ethiopia and Tanzania) and ongoing 
innovations (e.g., pro-poor subsidy design in Rwanda and mini-grid deployment for remote communities in Madagascar). 
Most countries also have integrated targets for clean cooking in their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). 
However, the region often lacks consistency in applying its own best practices, as well as financing and institutional 
capacity for their replication and scale-up. 
11. 
Achieving universal electricity access in the AFE region in a least-cost, sustainable manner may require as much 
as US$100 billion. More will be needed for continued investments to power economic growth and the clean energy 
transition. Given the limits on available public funding, a significant increase in private-sector financing will be necessary. 
Private investment in the region’s on-grid generation, however, has been constrained by the utilities’ creditworthiness, 
which poses a significant off-taker risk. An estimated 40 percent of utilities are not recovering their operating costs, which 
is affecting their ability to mobilize private capital for generation investments, as well as expand electricity access. DRE 
and clean cooking companies have started to attract private capital, but the lack of scale, slow progress, and mismatch 
between the return and risks of most DRE transactions have so far deterred mainstream investors from entering this 
market. That said, the DRE and clean cooking sectors have promising investment opportunities, which, according to 
market scoping carried out for the ASCENT Program, include a near-term pipeline of over US$4 billion and the overall 
potential of about US$40 billion under the universal electricity access scenario. Realizing these investment opportunities, 
however, requires addressing the underlying issues of an enabling environment, affordability of end users, 
implementation capacities, and transaction sizes and structures, including a more effective allocation of risks and 
incentives across public and private actors and availability of “fit-for-purpose” financing and de-risking instruments.  
World Bank engagement in the energy sector 
12. 
The World Bank’s engagement in the energy sector of the AFE region supports governments to deliver 
affordable, reliable, and sustainable energy services for all, recognizing that financing is not only needed to connect new 
users, but also to supply affordable, reliable, and quality electricity to both existing and new users in order to power 
economic growth. Private sector–led renewable energy investments also need to scale up in line with global climate goals. 
This all requires strong and financially viable utilities and power sectors with robust governance, capable institutions, an 
enabling environment, and trustworthy financing mechanisms. The World Bank is therefore applying a triangular approach 
to help governments (i) scale up access to energy services, (ii) promote regional power trade and integration, and (iii) 
create sustainable power sectors by bringing forward comprehensive solutions through a suite of instruments offered by 
the World Bank, the IFC, and MIGA.  
a) Scaling up access to energy services. The World Bank has been at the forefront of energy access scale-up in the 
AFE region, having supported the region’s successful electrification programs and availing more than US$3.5 
billion in financing over the last four-year period. ASCENT takes this support to the next level through a more 
comprehensive, strategic, and resolute approach. It expands on the country-driven electrification model, 
integrating insightful lessons from past efforts, while leveraging regional integration opportunities, global 
knowledge, and internal and external partnerships. Its design and implementation are informed and strengthened 
by (i) the World Bank energy team’s expanded capacity to generate data, analytics, knowledge, and technical 
assistance through Electrifying Africa (a large trust-funded advisory package implemented jointly by AFE and 
Western and Central Africa [AFW] energy teams) and (ii) innovation and upstream collaboration of the World 
Bank, the IFC, and MIGA under the Distributed Access with Renewable Energy Scale-up (DARES) Platform, 
described below. ASCENT’s focus is on delivering the downstream part of energy access: grid and DRE connections 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
12 
 
and access to clean cooking technologies and fuels for households, micro- and small businesses, farmers, and 
public institutions (e.g., schools and health clinics). 
b) Promoting regional power trade and integration. Regional power trade is key to assisting countries in enhancing 
power-supply reliability and energy security in a cost-efficient manner while contributing to increased access and 
addressing climate mitigation and adaptation challenges. The Bank is building on its long-standing support to the 
Southern Africa and Eastern Africa Power Pools (SAPP and EAPP), financing and facilitating regional transmission 
interconnections, transformative regional clean-energy generation projects, and regional power-market 
strengthening efforts. In addition to several ongoing and planned regional integration projects, the Bank is 
proposing a transformative scale-up via the planned US$1 billion Regional Electricity Transmission, Trade and 
Decarbonization (RETRADE) Project (P175190), a regional MPA. RETRADE aims to establish a robust and scalable 
platform that assists countries in the AFE region to increase cross-border electricity trade for enhancing energy 
security, resilience, and a transition toward a low-carbon energy sector and universal access. These efforts are 
complementary and synergetic to ASCENT. Leveraging the region’s abundant clean energy resources in an 
integrated manner will ensure that the connections realized under ASCENT are supplied with increasingly more 
affordable, reliable, and clean energy.  
c) Creating a sustainable power sector. The World Bank is ensuring the sustainability of energy access efforts through 
supporting sector reform and upstream investments in generation, transmission, and distribution. This includes 
developing reform roadmaps aligning the medium- and long-term sustainability of the power sector with the 
universal electricity access objective by addressing shortcomings in power system planning, private-sector 
mobilization, and financial and operational performance of the sector. In addition, institutional, policy, financing, 
and technical barriers for scaling up access are being addressed to enable ambitious electricity connection rollouts. 
Jointly with the IFC and MIGA, the Bank has to date developed detailed reform roadmaps for Angola, Eswatini, 
Lesotho, Malawi, Tanzania, and Sao Tome and Principe. Reform roadmaps for other AFE countries will be rolled 
out over the coming months. These roadmaps form the basis of the Bank’s country-level energy engagements and 
dialogues, feeding into the wider country partnership strategies. They are implemented through a series of 
reforms and complementary investments delivered over a medium-term period; the roadmaps leverage multiple 
instruments, including vertical MPAs and, as appropriate, stand-alone or programmatic DPOs with appropriate 
sequencing, acknowledging that successful outcomes require sustained efforts over a medium-term horizon.  
Well-functioning utilities are critical for enabling accelerated grid expansion—in terms of their capacity to carry 
out the needed investments in an accelerated time frame, as well as their ability to properly maintain their assets 
and enable investments in generation segments. Sector reforms can also open internal revenue streams for access 
expansion by reorienting inefficient subsidies and creating sustainable funding mechanisms for rural 
electrification efforts. Therefore, they are quite closely coordinated with ASCENT’s planned investments and 
technical assistance. All participating countries are expected to have reform roadmaps in place before joining 
ASCENT. Given their highly contextualized character, the reforms will be subsequently implemented outside of 
ASCENT; however, ASCENT will continue playing a critical role as their enabler and accelerator.   
13. 
ASCENT is conceived as a comprehensive accelerator of energy access efforts in the AFE region, aiming at the 
delivery of new electricity connections for 100 million people through both grid- and DRE-based solutions, while putting 
in motion wider efforts, processes, platforms, and partnerships that will set AFE countries on the path toward universal 
energy access. ASCENT will leverage the proposed IDA envelope of US$5 billion to signal the World Bank’s commitment 
to achieving SDG7 in the AFE region and mobilize an additional US$10 billion from development partners, governments, 
national utilities, private-sector and commercial funders, carbon markets, climate and other impact-oriented financiers, 
and philanthropic and other partners. While the program focus of ASCENT is primarily on helping AFE countries achieve 
universal electricity access, it will also place foundations for a similar ambition in the clean cooking space, considering its 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
13 
 
sizable health, gender, and climate benefits and acknowledging the potential for synergies in the delivery of electricity 
and clean cooking services. Alignment with adjacent and beneficiary sectors (including digital, agriculture, health, and 
education) will be sought to drive synergies in financing and impacts. To achieve its ambitious connection and financing 
mobilization targets, ASCENT will apply the following transformative design features, leveraging the structure and 
flexibility of the MPA and the new delivery model under the World Bank’s Evolution: 
a) Designing interventions for scale and replicability. ASCENT builds on the strengths of the country-driven model 
while leveraging opportunities for increased scale, efficiencies, and cost reduction of regional efforts and semi-
standardized approaches via the MPA’s menu framework. For example, a coordinated country-level and regional 
approach to scaling up mini grids can result in up to a 40 percent reduction in the levelized costs of energy through 
economies of scale, which can be enabled by building larger portfolios. The countries and regional facilities are 
being phased into the MPA as and when ready to implement the scaled-up approaches, while benefiting from 
comprehensive technical assistance and knowledge support to apply best practices and lessons from the MPA’s 
learning agenda.  
b) Enhanced partnerships across a broader spectrum of public and private stakeholders. Through the platform-based 
approach, ASCENT will strengthen partnerships with existing partners, improving efficiency and mutual 
accountability, while increasing efforts to develop new partnerships to leverage complementarities and synergies 
in available instruments, delivery models, and capabilities. This includes identifying and attracting new companies 
and investors to the energy access space, including those in adjacent sectors (e.g., agriculture, 
telecommunications, and mining). This will enable a larger volume of carbon revenues and other types of climate 
and sustainability funding and build stronger engagement with private and commercial funders, including the 
region’s development and commercial banks and philanthropies, while engaging civil society to seek grassroots 
support, particularly for ASCENT’s social inclusion and resilience agendas.  
c) Scaling up digital solutions for efficiency, impact, finance mobilization, and faster learning. ASCENT will launch 
comprehensive efforts to promote digitization and help participating governments and regional organizations to 
adopt digital platforms. Digitization will enable faster, more efficient and transparent planning, implementation, 
monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) of energy access efforts. Such efforts, particularly the digital MRVs, 
will contribute to finance mobilization; increased efficiency and transparency will build trust among private-sector 
service providers and their investors, and enable the aggregation and monetization of climate and other impacts. 
In addition, the digital platforms will enable real-time tracking and data for faster feedback loops, decision-making, 
and learning. 
d) Creating space for innovation to unlock the full potential of the One World Bank approach. ASCENT MPA’s strong 
and comprehensive learning agenda will allow it to develop and test new innovations and scale them through 
subsequent phases. This approach is essential, especially in the dynamic DRE and clean cooking sectors; ASCENT 
will apply innovations developed under DARES, including testing and fine-tuning approaches for joint work across 
World Bank institutions to grow the DRE and clean cooking sectors to scale. Examples of transformative 
innovations with learning potential include (i) a regional RBF piloted in the first wave of the MPA focusing on 
unserved and underserved areas, including in the FCV context; (ii) a comprehensive de-risking facility anticipated 
for upcoming phases, also paving the way for increased financing flows to FCV-affected countries; (iii) a private-
sector service model for electrifying schools and healthcare facilities, currently being conceptualized under DARES, 
working closely with health and education practices; (iv) rolling out the Scaling Mini Grid (IFC innovation) approach 
at a faster pace and scale; and (v) leveraging multisectoral approaches, particularly with agriculture, for delivering 
productive uses of energy (PUE) and supporting the food security objective, engaging with multiple global 
practices (e.g., finance, competitiveness and innovation [FCI], agriculture, climate change, and social protection). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
14 
 
14. 
Building skills and entrepreneurship opportunities, especially for women and youth. Sustainable scale-up of clean 
energy and access in the AFE region will require upskilling in all segments of the sector. In partnership with the Education 
Global Practice, ASCENT will launch a comprehensive energy-access skills assessment and skills development program to 
be delivered under COMESA’s leadership, working closely with the region’s education institutions; a particular focus will 
be closing gender gaps in energy employment, supporting female entrepreneurs, and creating and facilitating new job 
opportunities for young people, especially in the DRE supply chains, through a set of interventions (e.g., training programs, 
incubators, and internships). 
B.  Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
15. 
The ASCENT Program design reflects the evolution of the World Bank to deliver solutions and impacts at scale. 
ASCENT integrates key elements of the new vision expressed in the World Bank’s Evolution: (i) adopting an augmented 
country engagement approach that yields development outcomes at community, national, regional, and global levels; (ii) 
exploiting synergies from the mobilization of domestic revenues, private capital, and climate financing, while combining 
traditional and innovative instruments; and (iii) fully leveraging the potential of World Bank institutions, while also 
harnessing partnerships, recognizing that no single institution can meet the financing needs of ASCENT and that strategic 
concessional financing must be deployed to maximize impact. ASCENT’s MPA will form an important part of the proposed 
Energy Transition and Access (ETA) Global Challenge Program (GCP), which is under development as a response to eight 
global challenges identified as priorities in the World Bank Evolution. The ETA GCP will aim at increasing access to 
affordable, reliable, sustainable, and modern energy by scaling up clean energy, phasing down fossil-fuel use, and 
supporting a just transition. The ETA GCP will cover areas contributing to SDG 7, including expanding and improving energy 
access, scaling up energy efficiency, and increasing renewable energy integration, as well as interventions to phase down 
fossil fuels and decarbonize hard-to-abate sectors. The ETA GCP will be implemented through a set of coordinated country-
specific, regional, and global interventions. ASCENT will provide a key mechanism for implementing The ETA GCP in the 
AFE region, with energy access being the pathway to its energy transition.   
16. 
Achieving universal electricity access by 2030 is the World Bank’s priority for enabling sustainable development 
in the AFE region, including an intermediate target of doubling the pace of electricity access expansion through a scale-
up of successful country-based access programs and by leveraging DRE between now and 2026. ASCENT will contribute 
substantially to achieving the SDG7. Furthermore, it will contribute to the WBG’s Climate Change Action Plan 2021–25, 
the Next Generation Africa Climate Business Plan, and the World Bank’s Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV) Strategy 
2020–25. Moreover, it will contribute to human development and gender outcomes, including the Global Strategy for 
Health, Nutrition, and Population, and to the narrowing of gender gaps in alignment with the upcoming WBG Gender 
Strategy (FY24–30). It is also a key element of clean-energy-transition efforts globally. The overall ASCENT MPA design and 
all country interventions are aligned with the respective partnership frameworks of participating countries. The MPA also 
aligns with individual countries’ Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) and their National Adaptation Plans.  
17. 
The WBG’s Africa Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy (FY21–23) also emphasizes that 
achieving universal energy access is a priority for the region, highlighting the importance of harmonizing policy and 
regulations to create a regional market for DRE, increasing levels of cross-border power trade, and lowering the cost of 
energy services while improving affordability. ASCENT will contribute to regional integration outcomes and leverage 
regional integration approaches through (i) boosting regional electricity trade; (ii) contributing to electrification in border 
areas through cross-border electrification solutions; and (iii) creating a regional market for DRE, while mobilizing and 
enabling private capital.  
Enabling the One World Bank approach  
18. 
ASCENT will serve as an accelerator of private-sector investments both within and outside ASCENT’s MPA 
framework, leveraging the strengths of the One World Bank approach, as well as other strategic partnerships, following 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
15 
 
the principles of maximizing financing for development. In the grid segment, the potential to mobilize 
private/commercial capital is largely related to expanding renewable-energy generation and storage. Opportunities for 
private-sector participation are on a case-by-case basis in transmission and regional trade and through various modalities 
in distribution. These opportunities will be identified via the above-referenced reform roadmaps; the IFC and MIGA may 
participate in their realization, as appropriate, through deploying a mix of their financing and risk-mitigation instruments. 
The investments in generation, transmission, and regional trade go beyond ASCENT’s MPA framework and will be realized 
through parallel, aligned country or regional operations, which will not count as a part of ASCENT’s financing mobilization 
target.  
19. 
Targeted private-sector investments in distribution that result in increased connections are aligned with 
ASCENT’s MPA framework and can be implemented within ASCENT. Such opportunities are expected to be strongest in 
countries where the grid footprint is still limited, and where national utilities face financial and capacity challenges to 
expand services to new users. Innovations, such as grid-connected concessions, distribution sub-franchising models, and 
grid-connected mini grids will be explored in such cases with active participation of the IFC and MIGA.  
20. 
The World Bank, the IFC, and MIGA already collaborate closely on scaling up DRE-based electrification under 
the DARES Platform. The DRE sector offers promising opportunities for private-sector mobilization, given that it is already 
driven by private-sector service providers through innovative and impactful business models. Realizing the potential of 
the DRE sector, the World Bank, the IFC, and MIGA launched DARES in November 2022 at COP27 as their collaborative 
effort. DARES is implemented through five programmatic windows: (i) mini grids, (ii) off-grid solar (OGS) markets, (iii) 
electrifying schools and health facilities, (iv) powering farmers, and (v) commercial and Industrial (C&I)/grid-edge 
innovations. It provides upstream analytics and space for collaboration, innovation, and co-creation of approaches and 
instruments (including through leveraging cross-sector approaches across Global Practices, which are then implemented 
through coordinated and/or joint efforts of the World Bank, the IFC, MIGA, and partners.)   
21. 
ASCENT will be the key deployment mechanism for approaches and innovations developed under DARES. 
Specifically, with support and guidance from DARES, ASCENT will launch comprehensive efforts to close the gaps 
constraining DRE’s trajectory to scale through a set of phased regional and country interventions aimed at (i) building a 
larger regional ecosystem of policies, regulations, knowledge, and skills; (ii) delivering public-sector support for closing 
affordability gaps with efficiency, transparency, predictability, and needed scale; (iii) filling gaps in the current landscape 
of commercial financing (including debt, equity, and de-risking), tailored to the needs of a range of electrification-focused 
DRE and clean cooking companies; and (iv) innovating to increase further opportunities for private-capital mobilization 
(e.g., enabling the entry of new [larger] companies to the market and opening up new market segments, such as 
electrification of schools and health clinics, to the private sector). See Annex 9 for more details.  
22. 
A coordination mechanism for ASCENT has been established, leveraging (i) collaboration on sector diagnostics 
and medium-term reform and investment roadmaps and (ii) the DARES Platform, which is co-managed by a team from 
AFE, AFW, IFC and MIGA.  ASCENT also features team members from the IFC and MIGA and regular coordination meetings 
at both technical and management levels. A coordination mechanism to facilitate co-financing and alignment of 
approaches across key funders and guarantee providers, including IFC and MIGA, is also set up as a part of ASCENT’s 
acceleration and financing platforms. The ASCENT Regional Energy Access Financing Facilities will be implemented in 
complement and coordination with IFC. Larger private sector DRE projects will be co-financed by IFC, TDB, and other 
commercial funders, on a best-efforts basis, based on eligibility criteria to be mutually agreed upon. The coordination 
mechanism for the ASCENT financing facilities will establish detailed implementation modalities. 
Aligning with other transformative regional initiatives 
23. 
In line with the Knowledge Compact under the World Bank Evolution, ASCENT will benefit from the global 
knowledge produced under the ETA GCP, as well as exchanges on best practices with other regional MPAs and 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
16 
 
transformative engagements, especially in AFW and the Middle East and Northern Africa (MNA). Energy access is a 
global priority, supported by projects in multiple regions, with a growing concentration on Sub-Saharan Africa, where 84 
percent of the global population without electricity access reside. Accordingly, the World Bank has been increasing its 
energy access focus on Africa. Corporate scorecard data shows that Bank-supported operations in FY18-23 have directly 
provided new electricity access for 38 million people, 32 million of which were in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
24. 
ASCENT is leveraging lessons learned from both AFE and AFW operations.  The AFE and AFW regions collaborate 
to leverage and learn from each other. They jointly manage the Electrifying Africa advisory/technical assistance program, 
which promotes a joint generation and exchange of knowledge, learning, and cross-fertilization of ideas and approaches 
across the two regions. They are also jointly participating in the DARES Platform. The AFW region continues supporting 
energy access through a combination of impactful regional- and country-level interventions, including vertical MPAs. For 
example, the US$750 million IDA-funded Nigeria DARES project for scaling up access with DRE solutions is expected to 
leverage about US$1 billion in private and commercial capital. Both regions are applying new corporate scorecard 
indicators, which will allow aggregation of their results and contributions to the ETA GCP.   
25. 
ASCENT’s regional platform and broader support from the AFE region’s energy market will develop synergies 
with transformative regional integration initiatives in both AFW and MENA. Recognizing that development of a regional 
power market is instrumental to the energy transition, reliable supply, and the electrification agenda—and building on 
the Bank’s decade-long engagement with the West Africa Power Pool (WAPP), AFW is expanding its regional integration 
and trade efforts to support both energy transition and access goals.  Collaboration with the MENA region entails linkages 
between the emerging Pan-Arab electricity market and the EAPP and SAPP. As demand grows in AFE through grid 
expansion and last-mile access initiatives, new opportunities are expected to emerge for power trade between MENA and 
Africa Regions. These interlinked systems, including increased trade capacity beyond Africa with Europe and the Middle 
East through the new Bank-financed Tunisia-Italy interconnection project (approved in June 2023) (P179240) and other 
cross-Mediterranean interconnection projects under consideration between MENA and Europe, can accelerate a low-
carbon transition with larger-scale renewable-energy generation across the region, ensuring reliability and affordability of 
supply. 
C. Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
(i) Rationale 
26. 
Achieving the SDG 7 goal of universal energy access by 2030 in the AFE region requires a collective, coordinated, 
and flexible approach to mobilize finance, leverage implementation capacities of participating stakeholders (regional 
and local; public and private) and create a peer-to-peer mechanism. The MPA launches a systematic effort to deliver 
universal energy access in the region. The approach allows each country to accelerate energy access within its unique 
context, while creating regional synergies, leveraging regional integration approaches, and recognizing the transversal 
benefits of energy access that reaches across borders and sectors. The MPA demonstrates One World Bank commitment 
to the energy access agenda, matching AFE governments’ commitments, and inspiring other partners to join the efforts.  
27. 
The Program will support implementation of the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG’s) recommendations on 
the WBG’s energy access efforts; these are to (i) reposition itself as a global solutions provider in the sector going well 
beyond its own direct support for access; (ii) move from a predominantly project-by-project approach to a far greater use 
of a sector-wide framework and process; and (iii) engage decisively and intensively on low-access countries (mostly in Sub-
Saharan Africa). The Program will signal IDA commitment through the approval of a financing envelope (US$5 billion across 
two IDA cycles). While commitment of the actual financing amounts is contingent on available financing and country 
allocations, the program financing envelope will help with targeted fundraising through IDA cycles, as well as enable 
country-level donor financing to be actively pursued and aligned with country-specific projects under the Program. A 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
17 
 
cohesive and harmonized set of actions that supports the acceleration of electrification efforts in participating countries 
would also provide the necessary signal to unlock private capital flows. 
28. 
Key elements of the MPA embodied in ASCENT include (i) a regional mechanism for coordination and 
harmonization; (ii) aggregation for mobilization of capital and achieving economies of scale; and (iii) agile implementation, 
with reduced transaction costs in both design and implementation of AFE interventions, with benefits for all participating 
countries. A major benefit of the instrument is its replicable approach to achieve scale at the regional level. 
(ii) Program Results Chain 
29. 
The MPA results chain recognizes that access to energy contributes to outcomes at multiple levels. At the 
community and national level, it creates economic opportunities, enhances access to human development services and 
health and education outcomes, enables the digital economy, and improves quality of life and resilience. At the regional 
level, it increases demand for grid supply or private-sector companies’ demand for supply of DRE solutions, delivering 
economies of scale and attracting private capital. At the global level, it contributes to climate change mitigation, as well 
as adaptation through improving pandemic and disaster preparedness and reducing causes of fragility (Figure 2). One 
should note that the program aims to expand both electricity and clean cooking access, with electricity access being the 
primary target. The PAD, therefore, uses the term “energy access” when referring to both electricity and clean cooking 
and “electricity access” when referring only to electricity services. 
Figure 2: ASCENT Program Theory of Change 
 
 (iii) Program Development Objective with Key Indicators 
30. 
The Program Development Objective (PrDO), to which participating countries and regional institutions will 
contribute, is to increase access to sustainable and clean energy in Eastern and Southern African countries. Access to 
energy includes on-grid and off-grid (DRE) electricity solutions and clean cooking. Sustainability primarily refers to the 
importance of enhanced regional electricity trade to enable sufficiency of electricity supply and financially viable, private-
sector delivery models. Clean energy refers to the increased use of DRE and the associated climate-change mitigation 
benefits. The PrDO will be monitored by measuring progress on three outcomes (Table 1). Each phase under the program 
will contribute to one or more PrDO, as appropriate, and will also add relevant intermediate indicators, including 
renewable energy capacity installed or enabled, and private capital enabled or mobilized towards achieving the outcomes 
of providing people with electricity and reducing greenhouse gas emissions.     
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
18 
 
Table 1: PrDO-level Outcome Indicators of the ASCENT MPA 
Indicator 
Unit of measure 
End target 
PrDO1: People provided with electricity  
Number 
100,000,000 
PrDO2: Regional electricity trade due to grid-based electrification 
Percentage 
5 
PrDO3: Green House Gas Emission Reductions (CO2e) 
Metric tons  
80,000,000 
 
(iv) Program Framework 
31. 
The ASCENT MPA will support to more than 20 countries over a seven-year implementation period, with an 
estimated closing in 2030. This support will be complemented by technical assistance and financing platforms, 
implemented by regional entities. Program phases will be prepared as countries and regional platforms achieve readiness 
to implement new operations, in accordance with the program pillars within FY24–27. Readiness is assessed based on the 
expression of a clear commitment to energy access goals, key policy and reform actions to build an enabling environment, 
and demonstration of absorption capacity for the scaled-up energy access financing. Financing allocation among Program 
pillars will be determined as participating countries and organizations design components in their respective phases. Table 
2 approximates the expected IDA and non-IDA funding for the program overall, and by current and future phases. 
Table 2: Estimated IDA Allocation and Financing Mobilization under the Program 
Pillars  
Proposed IDA Allocation  
(US$, millions) 
Estimated Financing Mobilization from all 
non-IDA sources. 
(US$, millions) 
 
MPA Total  
All Phases 
Current 
Phases 
Future 
Phases 
MPA Target 
All Phases 
Current 
Phases 
Future 
Phases 
1. Platforms to Accelerate Energy 
Access  
500.00 
88.90 
411.10 
500.00 
28.00 
 
485.00 
2. Expanding Grid Electrification 
2,500.00 
555.00 
1,945.00 
3,500.00 
400.00 
 
3,100.00 
3. Scaling Distributed Renewables 
and Clean Cooking 
2,000.00 
419.10 
1,580.90 
6,000.00 
575.00 
5,700.00 
TOTAL 
5,000.00 
1063.00 
3,937.00 
10,000.00 
1,003.00 
 
8,997.00 
32. 
Country phasing and amounts are included in Annex 1. The first wave of projects consists of the following  phases: 
(i) COMESA Regional Energy Access Acceleration Platform IPF (under ASCENT MPA P180547); (ii) ASCENT Rwanda IPF 
(P180575); (iii) ASCENT Sao Tome and Principe, IPF (P177099); (iv) ASCENT Somalia IPF (P181341); (v) ASCENT Tanzania 
PforR (P179631); and (vi) TDB Regional Energy Access Financing Platform IPF (P181328). Table 3 and Annex 1 provide an 
overview of the first wave of projects, as well as anticipated future phases. 
(v) Learning Agenda 
The ASCENT MPA’s learning agenda is structured according to three broad learning areas:   
33. 
The first area evaluates the extent of the effectiveness of the programmatic platform approach to achieve the 
PrDO and whether it is delivering on its intended outcomes: (i) achieving scale while promoting inclusion, (ii) attracting 
the private sector and mobilizing finance, and (iii) building effective partnerships. The evaluation’s findings will be used to 
inform program implementation and seek mid-course adjustments. Initial countries were selected to exemplify varied 
stages and conditions of energy access across AFE and provide lessons for the design and implementation of country 
operations in subsequent phases. ASCENT will establish a regional knowledge-exchange platform to facilitate a rapid 
exchange of experiences and lessons across participating countries. Particular attention will be paid to documenting 
learning from the FCV context, with a view to developing replicable and scalable approaches. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
19 
 
34. 
The second area assesses the impacts of energy access. Growing evidence confirms the positive impacts of energy 
access for households, enterprises, schools, and health clinics; however, data often lacks granularity and, depending on 
circumstances, may even deliver contradictory findings. The ASCENT Program will assess the impacts of energy-access 
interventions at both the household level (e.g., welfare, health, income-generation, and gender) and community/society 
level (e.g., job creation, human capital development, resilience, and economic growth). One area of interest is the analysis 
of impacts on the quality of healthcare and education services. Research questions will also focus on systemic levels 
related to governance and institutional aspects in relation to energy-access provision, such as incentives at the central 
and local government levels. Of special significance to the program will be its linkage with regional integration and trade. 
Specifically, ASCENT will track and analyze the impacts of electrification on both the electricity trade and the wider trade 
agenda (e.g., increase in cross-border trade in electrified cross-border areas).  
35. 
The third area identifies “how to” aspects—that is, understanding the pathways through which intended 
outcomes and impacts are achieved and what leads to these results in some cases and not in others—to better inform the 
design of future energy-access efforts. These efforts will be supported by the Development Research Group, Office of the 
Chief Economist, and DIME (see Annex 8 for the Knowledge Compact).   
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic Approach (P180547) 
 
 
20 
 
Table 3: MPA Program Framework 
 
 
 
 
Phase 
 
 
 
Operation 
ID 
 
 
Sequential 
or 
simultaneous 
 
Phase’s DO: To increase 
access to sustainable and 
clean energy in Eastern 
and Southern African 
countries 
 
 
IPF 
or 
PforR 
Estimated 
IBRD 
amount 
(US$, 
millions) 
Estimated 
IDA 
amount 
(US$, 
millions) 
Estimated 
other 
amount 
(US$, 
millions) 
 
 
Estimated 
approval 
date 
 
Estimated 
E&S 
risk 
rating 
1 
P180547 
Simultaneous 
Common Market for 
Eastern and Souther 
Africa (COMESA) 
IPF 
0.00 
50.00 
15.00 
November 
30, 2023 
M 
2 
P180575 
Simultaneous 
Rwanda 
IPF 
0.00 
300.00 
100.00 
S 
3 
P177099 
Simultaneous 
Sao Tome and Principe 
IPF 
0.00 
38.00 
0.00 
S 
4 
P181341 
Simultaneous 
Somalia 
IPF 
0.00 
100.00 
0.00 
S 
5 
P179631 
Simultaneous 
Tanzania 
PforR 
0.00 
300.00 
0.00 
M 
6 
P181328 
Simultaneous 
Trade and Development 
Bank (TDB) 
IPF 
0.00 
275.00 
300.00 
S 
Total 
0.00 
1,063.00 
415.00 
 
Future 
Phases 
NA 
Simultaneous 
See Annex 1 
To Be 
Determined 
 
3,937.00 
TBD 
TBD 
TBD 
Financing Envelope 
$ 5,000.00 
 
  
Board-approved Financing Envelope 
$ 0.00 
  
  
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
 21
 
III. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
A. Program Components 
36. 
The ASCENT Program will take a systematic approach to accelerating AFE countries’ natural progression in 
energy-access efforts, reflecting the region’s diversity of electrification stages and conditions. A strategic sequencing of 
operations is key to maximizing impact. Countries that have already achieved high electrification rates will be helped to 
make the final leap to universal access, while fast-electrifying ones will be supported to stay on an accelerated pathway. 
Slower-electrifying countries will be helped to get on an accelerated electrification pathway; specific attention will be 
given to FCV-affected countries, which will be supported with contextualized innovations, particularly in the DRE space. 
Finally, small states with capacity constraints will be supported with comprehensive energy-access packaging. All countries 
will receive advisory support to strengthen climate resilience of the energy access investments. 
37. 
The first wave of operations establishes a foundation for ASCENT’s acceleration ambition. Four countries have 
been selected as electrification champions, representative of the energy access stages and contexts found in the AFE 
region, thereby providing both inspiration and lessons for countries facing similar conditions. Rwanda has been one of 
the world’s fastest electrifying countries and is now a leader in last-mile electrification, with innovative pro-poor financing 
mechanisms for both grid and off-grid electrification; its ambition is to achieve universal electricity access before 2030 
and significantly scale up access to clean coking. Tanzania, whose electrification rate is still below the regional average, 
has been mounting successful acceleration efforts; its focus is on fast-paced grid densification with an added ambition of 
accelerating DRE investments, which can serve as an example for countries that need to accelerate their efforts. Somalia 
exemplifies a complex context of an FCV-affected countries, where private sector–based DRE electrification is the only 
way to rapidly expand electricity access and the challenging investment environment calls for innovative approaches. 
Finally, Sao Tome and Principe reflects the challenges of expanding access in small isolated systems with limited capacity, 
where electricity expansion needs to go hand-in-hand with upstream investments in ensuring reliability, affordability, and 
capacity/skills building. Regional and national platforms will provide overall ecosystem support and benefit participating 
countries in all Program phases 
38. 
The ASENT Program’s components are organized into three pillars, under which the participating countries and 
regional facilities will drawn from its menu of options (Figure 3). 
Figure 3: Summary of the ASCENT Program’s Pillars
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
 22
 
39. 
Pillar 1: Regional and National Platforms to Accelerate Energy Access will finance technical assistance, tools, and 
capacity building for (i) digitization, including adoption of digital platforms and geospatial planning tools; (ii) energy-access 
strategies and planning, enabling policies, and regulations; (iii) financing of mobilization and coordination, including 
carbon/climate finance mobilization; (iv) data collection, market intelligence, and impact evaluations and knowledge 
exchange; (v) development and deployment of aggregation structures; (vi) analysis and approaches for streamlining value 
chains and identification of opportunities for local manufacturing and assembly; (vii) identification, facilitation, and 
support for cross-border electrification; (viii) cross-sector collaboration; (ix) advisory support for strengthening resilience 
and adaptation benefits for beneficiaries through improved design and implementation of grid- and off-grid electrification 
projects, including improved planning using geospatial tools and enhanced technical specifications; (x) skills development 
(including science, technology, engineering, and mathematics [STEM]), especially for women and youth with a view to 
increasing employment opportunities; (xi) productive use development, inclusion, consumer outreach, and awareness 
raising; and (xii) other technical assistance and capacity building for government agencies, national utilities, and DRE and 
clean cooking companies. Pillar 1 will also allow for coverage of project management costs and operating expenses. 
40. 
The ASCENT Regional Acceleration Platform, managed by COMESA, will drive implementation of Pillar 1 from the 
regional level. The Acceleration Platform will support the initial set of participating countries in implementing their 
respective projects, as well as help prepare countries for joining the Program. The Project Preparation Facility will provide 
support to DRE and clean cooking companies active in the region to accelerate their efforts and mobilize capital, while the 
Advisory Support Facility will provide technical assistance to government agencies. The Platform will (i) establish a D-MRV 
system at the regional level, allowing for data aggregation from countries and the private sector and enabling the 
generation of carbon revenues; (ii) identify and facilitate cross-border electrification opportunities; and (iii) facilitate 
knowledge exchange and skills development (including through strategic partnerships with academia), with an emphasis 
on enhancing opportunities for women and youth; this includes increasing employment of women with STEM backgrounds 
in energy utilities and DRE/clean cooking companies through targeted skills development programs, incubators, and 
internships, and supporting young and female entrepreneurs 
41. 
Pillar 2: Expanding Grid Electrification will finance investments and associated technical assistance for (i) grid 
densification and expansion, including cross-border electrification; (ii) grid reinforcement, upgrading, and variable 
renewable energy (VRE) integration investments, including battery storage, where required, to support electricity access 
expansion; (iii) grid connections, including ready boards, internal wiring, access to appliances, and productive uses; and 
(iv) utility strengthening, including management and monitoring systems, digitization, revenue protection programs, and 
other improvements needed to deliver fast-paced electrification. Technical assistance will include support for improving 
the climate resilience of assets and systems during design and implementation stages, as appropriate. 
42. 
Pillar 3: Scaling Distributed Renewables and Clean Cooking will finance investments and associated technical 
assistance to expand energy access with DREs and clean cooking technologies and fuels for households, enterprises, 
farmers, schools, health clinics, and other institutions, including through financial intermediary financing. The key building 
blocks that would be implemented by countries and regional financing facilities include (i) results-based financing (RBF), 
catalytic grants, and other forms of performance-based financing for DRE and clean cooking; (ii) DRE tenders, including 
the IFC-led initiative, Scaling Mini Grids, and other top-down approaches; (iii) debt and equity facilities, guarantees, and 
other de-risking instruments; and (iv) further innovations aimed at mobilizing capital for DRE and clean cooking, including 
DRE electrification and clean coking provision for health facilities, schools, and other public institutions. This pillar will be 
implemented in close coordination with the IFC and MIGA under the DARES Platform (see Annex 8).  
43. 
In addition to country-specific support, Pillar 3 will establish regional financing and de-risking facilities. These will 
be phased in gradually to support the evolving needs of the DRE and clean cooking sectors and leverage lessons generated 
from earlier phases via the MPA’s learning agenda. Both on-lending and de-risking are needed to respond to varied 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
 23
 
characteristics of larger and smaller companies in the various DRE and clean cooking segments. The first wave prioritizes 
on-lending as an agile response to the urgent financing needs of existing DRE and clean cooking companies, particularly 
to fill financing gaps (e.g., in longer-tenor loans, local currency, and SME financing). The MPA will therefore establish the 
ASCENT Regional Energy Access Financing (REAF) Platform, which will be implemented by the AFE Trade and Development 
Bank (TDB). The REAF Platform’s objective is to lend to DRE and clean cooking companies in order to unlock their pipeline 
and support their trajectory toward scale. The TDB was selected as the financial intermediary (FI) owing to its (i) 
geographic coverage of the AFE region; (ii) experience and demonstrated ability to lend to the DRE sector (built under the 
ongoing Regional Infrastructure Financing Facility (RIFF) Project, P171967); (iii) ability to offer longer-tenor debt; (iv) 
extensive network of regional and local commercial banks, to be leveraged through co- and on-lending;  and (v)  strong 
reputation as a well-managed, competent, and financially stable FI that is also willing and able to pursue impact-oriented 
financing, including for SMEs, which is closely aligned with ASCENT’s vision. The platform will mobilize additional private 
and commercial financing.  A coordination mechanism will be established before effectiveness to facilitate syndication/co-
financing and other collaboration with IFC and other funders.  
44. 
In parallel, a large, transformative regional de-risking facility is under joint development with the IFC and MIGA as 
ASCENT’s future phase, which will allow for continued growth of existing companies, while also attracting new companies 
and investors to the DRE and clean cooking sectors. In addition, a patient capital facility, under development, is to be 
brought up as a future phase focused on the needs of smaller companies, especially local companies and/or those 
operating in nascent markets... This phased approach is leveraging the potential of One World Bank approaches (and 
collaboration across energy and FCI), where appropriate, particularly on de-risking, while also building broader 
partnerships with other development and commercial funders. The idea is to ensure that all segments of DRE and clean 
cooking markets and companies, including those in FCV-affected areas, are covered to support both scale and inclusion. 
These will be developed and presented as a future phase (or two separate phases) of ASCENT. 
B. Project Beneficiaries 
45. 
The main beneficiaries of the ASCENT program are people in the AFE region who will gain access to a sustainable 
supply of electricity and clean cooking, along with the associated benefits that accrue from having energy access (e.g., 
increased jobs, access to information and technologies, improved health, reduced time spent on cooking chores, and 
better services provided by electrified schools and health clinics). Women, who are often burdened disproportionately by 
the lack of energy access, particularly for household cooking, will be provided additional income-generating and 
employment opportunities. Enterprises, schools, and health clinics (and their employees) will receive energy access. Other 
beneficiaries include electric utilities, private-sector providers of DRE and clean cooking, and project-supported 
government agencies, as well as the newly created workforce in the renewable energy/energy-access fields, particularly 
women, engaged in ASCENT skills development. ASCENT is expected to deliver electricity access to at least 100 million 
people (27 percent of region’s unelectrified population), while setting up acceleration approaches that would expand 
electricity access to an additional 200 million (bringing the total to 82 percent of the unelectrified population), particularly 
through enabling sustainable grid electrification by the utilities and further private capital mobilization for DRE 
electrification. Access to electricity is critical to improving household and community level resilience. A methodology will 
be developed to assess the climate change adaptation and resilience benefit created by the Program as people have, 
among others, access to information and public services, and new and diverse income opportunities. 
C. Rationale for Bank Involvement and the Role of Partners 
46. 
The World Bank has been at the forefront of energy access scale-up in Sub-Saharan Africa, including the AFE 
region. World Bank financing of energy access in the region has grown from an average of US$400 million per year in FY 
2018–20 to more than US$1 billion annually in FY 2021–23. Over the last four years, the World Bank has approved 
financing in the amount of US$3.5 billion, which would provide electricity access to 47 million people. This figure also 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
 24
 
includes increased funding for DREs and clean cooking, partially driven by incentives and co-funding from ESMAP’s Clean 
Cooking Fund. Combined with ESMAP knowledge and work in the area, the World Bank has been acknowledged as both 
the thought leader and top financier of energy access in the region, particularly in mini grids, the OGS sector, and clean 
cooking. A natural continuation of this journey, ASCENT signals the World Bank’s commitment to support the AFE region 
achieve universal energy access.  
47. 
The ASCENT Program is conceived as a broad-based partnership effort, aligning and attracting public- and 
private-sector partners. With a US$5 billion in IDA envelope, ASCENT aims to mobilize an additional US$10 billion, of 
which about US$1 billion has already been realized through the present first wave. including participation of large 
development partners such as the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) 
and various donors are contributing via both bank-executed and recipient-executed trust fund (RETF) grant contributions 
via ESMAP.  Climate financiers, including the Green Climate Fund (GCF) have been engaged and specific engagements are 
already under development to add to the current phases. A comprehensive framework for enabling carbon revenues is 
also under development under Phase 1 and in collaboration with the Climate Change Practice, enabled via ASCENT’s 
digitization efforts also under Phase 1.  Furthermore, strategic partnerships have been created with aligned entities, such 
as Sustainable Energy for All (SEforALL) and the Global Energy Alliance for People and Planet (GEAPP) to support advocacy, 
convening, knowledge, and innovation, and to drive catalytic impacts. Many other partnerships are under development 
and will be reflected in ASCENT’s future phases, which is also expected to further increase leveraging of public and private 
capital. A strategic approach for private-sector engagement in the DRE sector has been developed, built on strategic 
partnerships with other development and commercial funders and leveraging One World Bank approach. 
D. Lessons Learned  
48. 
Successful efforts to expand energy access are rooted in strong and consistent government commitment. Where 
such commitment exists, it is important to align resources with the government’s goals through a long-term programmatic 
platform approach, which would (i) put governments in the central role of priority setting and coordination of energy-
access efforts; (ii) support transparent, least-cost resource allocation; and (iii) mobilize financing by aligning governments, 
donors, and the private sector. 
49. 
AFE countries urgently need to accelerate both grid and DRE-based electrification. Successfully electrifying 
countries have demonstrated that accelerated pace is possible, particularly through a combination of grid and off-grid 
pathways. In some countries, this may require faster grid scale-up, while building up the conditions for private-sector 
engagement in DRE; in others, opportunities may be leveraged for DRE electrification while reforming a failing utility. One 
should not hold the other back; ultimately, complementary and parallel progress is needed on both fronts. 
50. 
Digitization can revolutionize energy access and vice versa. The emergence of digital platforms and tools have 
created unprecedented opportunities for improved and accelerated planning and implementation of energy access 
programs (especially those using RBF), as demonstrated by champion countries that have already taken steps in this 
direction. Also, opportunities are opening up to leverage such platforms for carbon finance and other resource 
mobilization.  
51. 
Energy access planning and investments need to go beyond connections to ensure that generation, 
transmission, and distribution are expanding in proportion to electrification and that utilities are financially and 
operationally sustainable to absorb new users, attract private-sector investments, and deliver reliable electricity services. 
On the user side, electrification must be accompanied by complementary measures to stimulate demand and productive 
uses to deliver the intended impacts and make electrification more viable for the utilities and DRE service providers.  
52. 
DRE technologies are promising solutions, but their scale-up requires overcoming market fragmentation, caused 
by inconsistent policies, regulatory environments, subsidy approaches, contractual arrangements, inadequate financing 
instruments, and small transaction sizes. More harmonized market conditions and aligned funding approaches would 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
 25
 
allow DRE companies to achieve economies of scale, reduce costs, and become profitable; as a result, they would attract 
larger volumes of private investments, including those from more mainstream, commercial investors. This goal is 
embodied in the WBG’s DARES Platform, which underpins implementation of the proposed energy-access-expansion 
approach for the AFE region. 
53. 
Mobilization of private-sector financing must be more strategic and systematic. This means it should not be 
based on short-term transactions alone but should also build the conditions for scaled-up, private-sector flows over the 
medium and long term. Given the still emerging nature of the DRE sector in the AFE region, a differentiated approach is 
needed to (i) help leading DRE companies take the next step in leaping toward scale, market expansion, and commercial 
viability; (ii) support the growth of second-generation and smaller local companies; and (iii) attract new, larger companies 
to the market.  
54. 
Investments in energy access must be accompanied by faster knowledge exchange and massive technical 
assistance and capacity- and skills-building efforts. Even when sufficient financing to close the energy access gap is 
mobilized, the outcome may not be achieved due to the limited absorption capacity of implementing agencies. Significant 
capacity building and technical support during both the design and implementation stages are needed. Countries also 
need to develop effective mechanisms to learn from each other so that successful approaches can be replicated, scaled 
up, and adapted faster to varied country contexts.  
55. 
Energy access efforts must be more inclusive and address affordability challenges and constraints of vulnerable 
groups. In the AFE region, more than half of the population without electricity access live in FCV-affected countries, where 
lack of access to clean cooking and electricity disproportionately affects low-income and vulnerable populations, especially 
women and girls. Further progress in accelerating energy access cannot be achieved without significantly increasing 
electricity and clean-cooking access rates among the remote, poorest, and most vulnerable population segments, 
including displacement-affected communities, as well as female-headed households (FHHs). This requires creative, 
context-sensitive solutions, as well as better targeting, supported by increased availability of data and digital tools. 
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
56. 
Country-level institutional and implementation arrangements, described in the country annexes, follow those 
established by each respective country for its energy access expansion. Typically, they involve government ministries in 
charge of energy, rural energy agencies, and national utilities, as well as financial institutions in cases where intermediary 
financing is involved. Each country and regional operation will be independently implemented. 
57. 
At the regional level, the COMESA and TDB have been selected to implement regional activities, based on their 
existing working relationship with countries, private-sector companies, and financial institutions in the region, as well as 
their track record of implementing World Bank–financed projects, particularly in energy access under the Regional 
Infrastructure Financing Facility (RIFF) Project (P171967). Detailed implementation arrangements for each phase are in 
Annexes 2–7.  
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
58. 
ASCENT’s progress and implementation will be monitored at program, regional and project levels. ASCENT has 
established a menu of indicators for individual countries and regional facilities to select from, which will contribute to 
aligned monitoring of outcomes for the Program. Each operation will be responsible for monitoring its project 
implementation and results, with COMESA monitoring of results for the entire program. Monitoring will be facilitated 
through the adoption of digital platforms, which will allow aggregation of results, and individualized dashboards designed 
for stakeholders (World Bank, COMESA, government agencies, utilities, and the private sector) to improve continuous 
monitoring. As noted in the Learning Agenda, the Program will support a multi-layer effort to strengthen (i) energy access–
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
 26
 
related data collection and analysis and the statistical capacity of key stakeholders, including COMESA and national 
agencies; (ii) structured and systematic impact evaluation through partnerships with research institutions and donor 
partners; and (iii) collaborative research with pilot countries to inform improved planning and governance. 
 C. Sustainability 
59. 
All of the proposed interventions are designed to have a lasting impact, including enhancement of climate 
resilience of the infrastructure and communities. Sustainability is safeguarded at technical, economic and financial, 
operational, and environmental levels. At the technical level, ASCENT investments will only finance proven technologies 
and adhere to adequate technical standards, including international quality standards for OGS and clean cooking.  At the 
economic and financial level, the interventions will follow a least-cost electrification plan, promoting efficient allocation 
of resources and ensuring that interventions are economically viable. Only sustainable business models will be supported 
that demonstrate budgetary and technical capacity for adequate sustainable operation and maintenance arrangements. 
Grid extension will be accompanied by utility strengthening and further supported by separate but aligned interventions 
aimed at ensuring sustainable energy sectors. Technical assistance available through COMESA’s Regional Acceleration 
Platform will ensure that government agencies, utilities, and private-sector companies can access the best-available 
knowledge and experts and technical assistance in order to integrate best practices into their operations. ASCENT is 
expected to deliver positive environmental externalities through supporting access to clean energy, including renewable 
energy and clean cooking, which is expected to result in greenhouse gas (GHG) reductions (measured as a PrDO indicator), 
as well as positive local environmental benefits (e.g., through a reduction in the harvesting of non-renewable biomass 
used in traditional cooking practices). Furthermore, the program will provide advisory support to public and private sector 
participating entities to strengthen climate resilience of the infrastructure during implementation and of institutions and 
community-level users during its technical lifetime. 
60. 
Paris Alignment: The ASCENT MPA is fully aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. 
Addressing and building climate-change resilience and preparedness at both energy sector and community levels are 
among the Program’s fundamental activities. A summary of the projects’ climate disaster risk screening and climate 
financing informing climate co-benefits can be found in the ASCENT Technical Note on Climate Change, which is available 
on request. The Program supports implementation of climate mitigation and adaptation actions at national and regional 
organizational levels by providing communities access to electricity, as well as building energy-sector and community-level 
resilience to climate change. Alignment with NDCs, National Adaptation Plans (NAPs), and energy-sector strategies, along 
with adaptation and mitigation risks and measures to address these, have been assessed and confirmed for the first wave 
of countries and implementing agency in the relevant annexes.  
61. 
The ASCENT Program is expected to manage risks of severe climate shocks to the activities that enhance energy 
access through on-grid and DRE solutions through associated strengthening of sector institutions, private-sector 
engagement, and relevant policies and processes. The regional technical assistance platform will provide dedicated 
support for informing climate-resilient design of projects through geospatial planning, technical recommendations, as 
appropriate, and training for public and private sector participants. This will build capacity across AFE region to 
understand, identify and implement asset-level and system-level measures to strengthen resilience. Mitigation goals are 
central to design of the ASCENT Program, which will be expected to significantly reduce GHG emissions across the region. 
It is anticipated that all activities financed by the ASCENT Program will be from the list of universally aligned activities.   
62. 
Gender Responsiveness: The AFE region has made tremendous progress in closing gender gaps in the last decade; 
however, the evidence pertaining to the energy sector shows the contrary, especially with respect to access to clean and 
modern energy. To maximize equitable development outcomes consistent with SDG 5 (gender equality) and SDG 7, it is 
important not only to have a comprehensive strategy to accelerate the closing of energy access gaps but also account for 
gender differences in the demand for and usage of energy. The ASCENT program is committed to integrating gender-
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
 27
 
transformative approaches to close energy access–related gender gaps and employ interventions to empower women to 
make meaningful contributions to the AFE energy sector. Through technical assistance to COMESA, the project will 
develop a comprehensive regional Gender Action Plan to build capacity for gender integration in the energy sector in 
COMESA member states, including development of a regional Women’s Leadership Institute and STEM Skills Accelerator 
Institute, which will enable women’s employment in the energy sector, leading to their promotion to leadership positions. 
With the TDB regional finance facility, the ASCENT program will utilize RBF and other strategies with gender-targeted 
incentives to increase (i) the employment of women with STEM backgrounds and (ii) energy access for women-owned 
small and medium enterprises (SMEs) to improve their productivity. In addition, the program will include a specific goal in 
its monitoring and evaluation (M&E) indicator to increase the number (percentage) of women with STEM backgrounds 
employed in the energy sector. The regional approaches will be complemented by country interventions to close gender 
gaps in the first wave of projects (Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Somalia, and Tanzania). Further details are provided in 
the ASCENT Technical Note on Gender available on request. 
63. 
Citizen Engagement: Design and implementation modalities of energy access projects inherently rely on extensive 
citizen engagement. Energy access activities, led by government agencies and the private sector, begin with initial 
consultations with relevant communities at a project’s design stage. This is important for understanding the community’s 
needs and concerns, as these will directly affect the intervention’s effectiveness and sustainability. During implementation 
of the ASCENT projects, citizen feedback will be solicited through surveys and stakeholder engagement, as articulated in 
the country and regional Stakeholder Engagement Plans (SEPs) and through digitally enabled periodic surveys of a sample 
of ASCENT households; micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs); and public institution beneficiaries. The surveys 
will gather their energy-access status and challenges, including satisfaction with service, to address the challenges and 
improve service delivery. Survey results will be shared with all key stakeholders, including government agencies and utility 
or private-sector service providers, and used to take informed corrective actions, as needed. Moreover, country-specific 
grievance redress mechanisms will be developed and used. All ASCENT projects will have at least two citizen engagement 
indicators that will monitor progress on upstream engagement prior to, during, and ex-post implementation to create a 
feedback loop that informs continuous improvement in program implementation and contributes to the learning agenda. 
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY 
A. Technical, Economic, and Financial Analysis 
Technical Analysis 
64. 
Project activities are based on known technologies and business and implementation models. Grid 
electrification will use well-established technologies and methods. The typical investments will include extensions and 
strengthening of low-voltage (LV) and medium-voltage (MV) lines, substations, transformers, and service drops. The 
projects may finance ready boards and internal wiring to increase affordability of connections, as well as appliances and 
productive-use equipment. Country-specific projects may also include variable renewable energy (VRE) integration 
investments and equipment, including battery storage. Financing of large-scale transmission is not expected; however, on 
case-by-case basis, ASCENT may finance small-scale extension and upgrading of the transmission network, as necessary, 
for achieving the project’s objectives if consistent with ASCENT’s E&S instruments and risks. 
65. 
ASCENT will support a range of DRE technologies (e.g., small solar home systems [SHSs]; mini grids; and 
productive-use systems serving SMEs, farmers, and public institutions) and clean cooking technologies and fuels. The 
program will not finance DRE systems larger than 20 MW. SHSs (typically in a range of 3–350 Wp) will typically be plug-
and-play; comprising a solar panel, battery, and appliances, the system will come in one box and can be installed by the 
customer. Productive use of energy (PUE) systems, typically consisting of larger stand-alone solar photovoltaic (PV) and 
battery storage systems, often replacing diesel generators; sometimes bundled with specialized appliances, they are 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
 28
 
especially used by the agriculture sector to transform productivity or preserve produce through cold storage. Renewable-
energy mini grids are electric power generation and distribution systems that provide electricity to a small group of 
customers (from the size of a village to that of a city). They are powered primarily by solar PV and batteries, but can also 
use other renewable energy technologies, such as micro- and mini hydropower. Mini grids and systems for public 
institutions, such as schools and health clinics, are typically in the single kW to 100kW range, but larger mini grids (under 
20 MW) are also possible. Mini grids and similar systems to power such public institutions as hospitals may include a diesel 
back-up in line with Paris Alignment methodologies. The program will only support diesel back-up where its role is marginal 
and meets the following conditions: (i) renewable-energy generation units are well maintained, and fossil-fuel generation 
is used only when the amount of renewable energy generated and stored cannot fully meet demand and (ii) fossil fuel 
generation is less costly than installing sufficient battery storage to meet the same demand. ASCENT will not finance 
captive-power for commercial and industrial (C&I) customers unless investments are directly linked to expanding energy 
access and comply with all other program criteria. E-mobility business models may be supported when linked to energy 
access, e.g., as a productive use under mini grids. 
66. 
ASCENT will support clean and improved cooking solutions. Clean cooking solutions refer to technology and fuel 
combinations that meet the recommended indoor-air-quality guidelines of the World Health Organization (WHO) for 
household fuel combustion. Common fuels and technologies considered eligible are cookstoves or devices powered by 
electricity, natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), biogas, solar energy, and alcohol fuels (e.g., ethanol). Low-emission 
biomass stoves using processed biomass (e.g., pellets) that meet ISO/TR 19867-3 voluntary performance targets for Tier 
4 and above are also considered clean. Improved cooking solutions are those that meet ISO/TR 19867-3 voluntary 
performance targets for Tier 3. Typical improved cooking solutions include advanced biomass stoves that can achieve 
some health and climate benefits. The program will not finance natural gas or LPG production; however, LPG distributors 
that serve end users, including uses of the PAYG model, will be eligible for support where LPG is considered the least-cost 
solution. Companies that produce and/or distribute cookstoves (cooking devices) that meet ISO/TR 19867-3 voluntary 
performance targets for Tier 3 and above are eligible. Electric stoves are eligible. Companies that produce and/or 
distribute renewable clean cooking fuels (e.g., pellets, briquettes, bioethanol, and biogas) are also eligible. 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
67. 
The economic viability of the proposed MPA was assessed using a standard cost-benefit analysis; the benefits 
captured, while significant, represent only a fraction of the full spectrum of advantages that electrification can bring to 
households, MSMEs, commercial enterprises, and productive end users. Several studies provide evidence that 
electrification can trigger a virtuous cycle of economic and social development, extending far beyond initial savings. 
Electrification essentially facilitates a shift toward more lucrative occupations (Akpandjar and Kitchens 2017) by 
stimulating the establishment of small businesses, reducing reliance on agriculture, promoting skills development, and 
increasing wage-earning opportunities. Burlig and Preonas (2023) reinforce the notion that electrification extends its 
positive impact beyond individual households. At the regional level, it stimulates manufacturing output, boosts 
employment opportunities, and elevates human development indicators. This macroeconomic effect can be particularly 
beneficial for local economies and job markets. Research conducted in South Africa (Dinkelman 2011) indicates that 
electrification has a particularly positive impact on female employment. It enables women to engage in income-generating 
activities by freeing up their time, thanks to reduced reliance on traditional fuels and the adoption of electricity for various 
tasks. Notwithstanding the cost-savings focus of this analysis, it is crucial to understand that electrification sets in motion 
a cycle of benefits. These encompass the establishment of more businesses, a transition to higher-value production, 
improved education outcomes, better health, and increased employment opportunities. Over time, these positive effects 
accumulate, significantly enhancing the well-being of the communities and regions served. These benefits are difficult to 
capture in ex-ante economic analysis but will be pursued via impact evaluations, as elaborated in the Learning Agenda 
and Annex 9.  Inclusion of all benefits would further increase the economic rates of return. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
 29
 
68. 
The analysis focuses on all of the ASCENT pillars and technologies: investment in electrification subprojects that 
encompass grid connections, grid reinforcement and extension, mini-grid connections, electrification through off-grid 
systems, and clean cooking connections.  
• 
The economic costs include the project capital costs and operating costs under the grid, mini-grid, and off-grid 
subprojects, as well as the connection costs incurred by households, the generation cost of the additional 
electricity served to newly grid-connected households, and the replacement costs of mini-grid batteries. For the 
clean cooking component, the economic costs comprise those for the stoves themselves and their operation, 
consisting mainly of fuel costs.  
• 
The economic benefits of the MPA are estimated as the avoided cost of diesel and lighting alternatives, reduction 
in unserved demand due to improved reliability of electricity supply, and savings on expenditure from the use of 
more efficient stoves. All components have economic benefit from GHG emissions reduction.  
69. 
Overall, the ASCENT program demonstrates economic viability, with an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) 
of 32 percent and a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$14 billion at the discount rate of 6 percent. Table 4 provides further 
details. The analysis assumes discount rates of 6 percent and 10 percent for economic and financial analysis, respectively. 
Over its lifetime, the proposed MPA is expected to have a net GHG impact of approximately 80 million tons of carbon 
dioxide equivalent (tCO2e). 
Table 4: EIRR and NPV for the Proposed MPA 
Overall program 
EIRR (%) 
NPV (US$, billions) 
Without GHG benefits 
32 
14.0 
With GHG benefits (low) 
38 
16.7 
With GHG benefits (high) 
44 
19.5 
70. 
The financial analysis for grid electrification assesses the impact of offering electricity service from the utility's 
perspective, while that for mini grids, off-grid access, and clean cooking solutions is conducted from the consumer’s 
perspective since these services will be provided by the private sector. The results of the financial analysis reveal that the 
on-grid investments of the proposed MPA have a negative NPV of -US$683 million and an associated financial Internal 
Rate of Return (FIRR) of 4 percent. The financial analysis of the grid reinforcement activities also has a negative NPV of -
US$171 million and an associated FIRR of 6 percent. The presence of a positive FIRR is a clear signal that the anticipated 
future cash flows surpass the cost of financing, underscoring the grid component’s financial viability over the extended 
period. Moreover, concessional financing and grants, with extended loan repayment periods, serve as vital tools, can help 
offset initial costs and reduce financial risks, aligning it with societal and policy priorities. In the context of grid 
electrification, a negative NPV emphasizes the multifaceted nature of public infrastructure investments, where the 
economic and social benefits created far exceed immediate financial returns.  
71. 
The financial analysis for the off-grid component of the MPA yields positive results, with an FIRR of 30 percent and 
an NPV of US$333 million. The RBF provision for the clean cooking activities, allows for a high FIRR of 70 percent and an 
NPV of US$136.5 million. Investments in mini grids result in a positive financial NPV of US$576 million, with an FIRR of 14 
percent. The financial feasibility for financial intermediation is calculated by discounting the net cash inflows and outflows 
of a financial intermediary (FI). The FI is assumed to receive a total of US$250 million credit disbursed over five years at 
an interest rate of 6 percent, with a tenor of 18 years and a 5-year grace period. The cash outflows consist of the 
repayments to the World Bank credit. The FI is assumed to on-lend at a rate of 8 percent for a 15-year tenor to mini-grid 
companies, a 6-year tenor at 7 percent to off-grid companies, and a 5-year tenor at 8 percent to clean cooking companies. 
The cash inflows are calculated from the repayments of loans from on-lending to the FI. The cash flow model assumes a 
default payment rate of 5 percent and an operations and maintenance (O&M) expense of 4 percent of the FI’s revenue 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
 30
 
from the MPA. This component is financially viable, with an estimated NPV of US$12 million and an associated FIRR of 11 
percent.  The discount rate for the financial analysis is 10 percent. 
72. 
The program is robust to credible changes in parameters. The economic rate of return for the grid component is 
sensitive to connection cost and has a switching value of US$1,1180 per connection, which is reached when the EIRR 
reaches the hurdle rate of 6 percent. For the off-grid component, the EIRR decreases to 6 percent when the price of the 
SHS reaches US$339 (including the value-added tax [VAT]), up from the US$207 (including the VAT) used in the analysis, 
which represents the median price for a 11–20 Wp SHS capable of providing Tier 1 service. The economic return on mini 
grids is sensitive to the price of diesel, which is the alternative source of fuel, and has a switching value of US$0.39 per 
kWh, down from US$0.80 per kWh. At this price of diesel, the benefits of switching to mini grids are lower than the cost. 
B. Fiduciary 
73. 
Financial Management. The financial management (FM) assessments for the project implementing agencies were 
conducted using World Bank Guidance: FM Manual for World Bank Investment Project Financing Operations, reissued on 
September 7, 2021. Assessments were conducted for the countries and regional institutions covered in first wave of the 
ASCENT program and included in the respective technical documents (summarized in the country and regional institution 
annexes). Procurement under PforR operations will follow procurement arrangements that will be detailed in the fiduciary 
systems assessments for those operations. 
74. 
Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the following World Bank procedures: The World Bank 
Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers, fourth edition, dated September 2023; Guidelines on Preventing and 
Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants, dated October 15, 2006 
and revised in January 2011 and Anti-Corruption Guidelines as of July 1, 2016; and other provisions stipulated in the 
Financing Agreements. Procurement arrangements, capacity assessment, risks, and risk mitigation for first wave of 
borrower/recipients are detailed in the respective PADs and summarized in the country and regional institution annexes.  
75. 
To mitigate for the potential risk of forced labor, the bidding documents will emphasize forced labor risks in solar 
panels and components and will require that sellers of solar panels to the project will not engage or employ any forced 
labor among their work force. Bidders will be required to provide two declarations: a Forced Labor Performance 
Declaration (which covers past performance), and a Forced Labor Declaration (which covers future commitments to 
prevent, monitor and report on any forced labor, cascading the requirements to their own sub-contractors and suppliers).  
In addition, enhanced language on forced labor will be included in the procurement contracts.  The Bank will prior review 
procurements of solar panels and components to ensure that enhanced provisions are used by the Borrower. Procurement 
and FM procedures will be reflected in the respective Project Operations Manuals. 
C. Legal Operational Policies 
 
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate 
Legal Operational Policies 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
No 
Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60 
No 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D. Environmental and Social 
 
The World Bank 
 
Accelerating Sustainable & Clean Energy Access Transformation Program using the Mutiphase Programmatic 
Approach (P180547) 
 
 
 31
 
76. 
The environmental risk of the overall program is rated as Substantial. Construction activities related to Pillar 2 
(e.g., creation of a right-of-way [ROW,] substations, LV and MV distribution lines, and access roads) can lead to habitat 
alteration, disruption and fragmentation. This can affect natural and critical habitats (e.g., wetlands), whose loss or 
modification can adversely impact flora and fauna, especially in countries that are home to endemic or endangered 
species. Other risks and hazards relate to live wires, accidents, injuries, working at height, the security and health of 
workers and nearby communities during construction and operation of LV and MV lines and associated infrastructure 
(e.g., transformers.) The construction and maintenance of transmission line ROW can pose fatal risks to birds and bats 
through collisions with power lines, which may result in power outages and forest/bush fires requiring an emergency 
response mechanism to be in place. The ASCENT program will offer significant environmental co-benefits through 
optimization of 