[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 49764 chars (29.0% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
1. 
Ethiopia is a large and geographically diverse country, with a representation of 98 
nationalities and peoples who speak 93 languages, a total population of about 90 million, 
and a population growth rate of 2.5 percent in 2014 (according to the United Nations). At 
that rate, the United Nations estimates that the population will reach 130 million by 2025. 
Ethiopia is projected to be among the world’s 10 largest countries by population in 2050. 
International Development Association (IDA) commitments to Ethiopia in recent years have 
been over US$1 billion per year. Making progress on the two goals of the World Bank Group in 
Ethiopia is, therefore, important both for global progress and for the country itself. 
2. 
Ethiopia remains one of the world’s poorest countries but has achieved high levels 
of economic growth and made substantial progress on social and human development over 
the past decade. Ethiopia’s economic growth has been remarkably rapid and stable over the past 
decade. Real GDP growth averaged 10.9 percent in 2004–2014, according to official data. By 
taking into consideration population growth of 2.5 percent over the past decade, real GDP 
growth per capita averaged 8.0 percent per year1. The country’s per capita income of US$550 
(Atlas GNI, 2014) is substantially lower than the regional average of US$1,257 and among the 
eleven lowest worldwide. Ethiopia is ranked 173 out of 187 countries on the Human 
Development Index (HDI) (2014) of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 
However, economic growth has helped reduce poverty in both urban and rural areas. Since 2005, 
2.5 million people have been lifted out of poverty, and the share of population below the poverty 
line has fallen from 38.7 percent in 2004/05 to 29.6 percent in 2010/11 (using a poverty line of 
close to US$1.25/day). Ethiopia is among the countries that have made the fastest progress on 
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and HDI ranking over the past decade. It is on track 
to achieve the MDGs for gender parity in education, child mortality, HIV/AIDS, and malaria. 
Good progress has also been made in universal primary education, although the MDG target may 
not be met. 
3. 
Ethiopia’s constitution ensures a federal, democratic system. Ethiopia’s current 
government system was established in the early 1990s by the Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary 
Democratic Front, which took over the country in 1991 after militarily defeating the previous 
regime. Since 2003, the country has actively pursued decentralization of governance to the 
regional and woreda levels—a woreda is a district with an average population of 100,000. 
Ethiopia marked an important milestone in August 2012 with the first peaceful and constitutional 
transition of power in Ethiopia’s modern history, with the appointment of H.E. Hailemariam 
Desalegn as prime minister, following the death of Meles Zenawi, who had led Ethiopia since 
the Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Democratic Front took over. 
4. 
The Government of Ethiopia (GoE) has completed its Growth and Transformation 
Plan (GTP) (2010/11–2014/15), which sets a long-term goal for Ethiopia to become a 
middle-income country by 2025, with growth rates of at least 11.2 percent per year during 
                                                 
1 Using UN population estimates and applying them to the official national accounts data in constant factor prices. 
 
8
the plan period. To achieve the GTP goals and objectives, the GoE has followed a 
“developmental state” model with a strong role for the Government in certain aspects of the 
economy. It has prioritized key sectors such as industry and agriculture as drivers of sustained 
economic growth and job creation. The GTP also reaffirms the GoE’s commitment to human 
development. The programs of development partners (DPs) are broadly aligned with GTP 
priorities.  
5. 
The GoE has developed and issued the GTP II (2016–2020) which emphasizes the 
key role of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) for the local economy and highlights the 
promotion of financial inclusion as a main priority in the development agenda. During the 
GTP II period, greater emphasis will be placed also on strengthening modern payment systems 
and developing regulations based on international standards. A National Financial Inclusion 
Strategy for the next five years was approved in January 2016 by the National Council for 
Financial Inclusion. 
6. 
The World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY13–FY16 sets 
out the principles for engagement within this framework, as recently reviewed in the 2014 
CPS Progress Report. The CPS supports the GoE in implementing the GTP. It includes two 
primary pillars and seven strategic objectives. Pillar One (Fostering Competitiveness and 
Employment) aims to support Ethiopia in achieving the following strategic objectives: (a) a 
stable macroeconomic environment; (b) increased competitiveness and productivity (a particular 
area of focus for the IFC); (c) increased and improved delivery of infrastructure; and (d) 
enhanced regional integration. Pillar Two (Enhancing Resilience and Reducing Vulnerabilities) 
aims to support Ethiopia through (e) improved delivery of social services; and (f) comprehensive 
social protection and risk management. The CPS also has a foundation of (g) good governance 
and state building. In line with the GTP, gender and climate change have been included as cross-
cutting issues in the CPS. The CPS Progress Report reconfirmed these strategic objectives while 
noting that the Bank Group will place renewed emphasis on a stable macroeconomic 
environment, increased competitiveness and productivity, regional integration, and the 
urbanization process. 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
7. 
Ethiopia’s financial sector is dominated by the banking sector (commercial banks), 
which currently represents more than 92.6 percent of total assets of the financial sector, 
excluding the assets of the Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE) and National Bank of 
Ethiopia (NBE). Microfinance institutions (MFIs) constitute 5.2 percent and insurance 
companies 2.2 percent of the total financial sector assets. The Ethiopian financial sector consists 
of two public banks (i.e. the DBE and the Commercial Bank of Ethiopia (CBE)), 16 private 
banks, 17 insurance companies, 33 MFIs, and five capital goods finance companies.  
8. 
The banking sector is operated exclusively by domestic banks and dominated by 
state-owned banks. State-owned banks, which mainly focus on financing large enterprises, 
constitute 70 percent of total assets of the banking sector and are dominating the credit market 
share of lending. The government-owned CBE is the dominant commercial bank and accounts 
for 60 percent of total assets of banks as of June 30, 2015. The share of private banks assets to 
total assets of the banking sector declined from 36 percent in 2008/09 to 30 percent in Q3 2015. 
 
9
Domestic credit to private sector as a ratio of GDP was estimated around 18 percent below the 
Sub-Saharan Africa average of 30 percent in 2013. Total outstanding credit of the banking 
system - excluding credit to Government and interbank lending - reached ETB 205.7 
billion/approx. US$10 billion at the end of March 2015,2 a 26.2 percent increase compared to the 
previous year. Finally, the banking sector in Ethiopia remains closed to foreign banks. 
Table 1. Overview of Ethiopia’s Financial System (Main Formal Financial Institutions)  
  
9. 
Banks are profitable and well-capitalized although liquidity is a concern. The 
Ethiopian banking sector continues to show favorable aggregate indicators: in March 2015 the 
average risk weighted, system-wide capital adequacy ratio was 16.6 percent (double the 
minimum requirement); profitability was robust (with return on assets (ROA) at 3 percent and 
return on equity (ROE) at 45 percent, well above regional averages); and the non-performing 
loan ratio was only 2.4 percent. However, no Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) has 
been conducted in Ethiopia and the absence of detailed bank data precludes the assessment of 
potential vulnerabilities in individual banks. 
10. 
The minimum deposit rate, regulated by NBE, has remained constant for the past 
five years at 5.0 percent. The lending rate to final borrowers is fully liberalized, but has been 
relatively unchanged over the same period with minimum and maximum observed lending rates 
unchanged at 7.5 and 16.25 percent, respectively. For banks to increase their lending in support 
of structural transformation, they need to extend the average maturity of their deposit base. 
Longer-term deposits currently only account for 11 percent of the deposit base. Banks pay about 
10 percent on longer-term deposits, roughly twice the interest rate on savings accounts. 
However, even these higher rates do not ensure a positive real rate of return on deposits. In 
addition, depending on the actual nominal lending rate which currently fluctuates between 7.5 
and 16.25 percent, the real interest rate might be positive or negative given the headline inflation 
of 11.8 percent as of July 20154.  
                                                 
2 FX Rate as of 3/31/15: US$1 = ETB 20.43. Source: www.xe.com 
3 Source: NBE 2013/14 Annual Report, and 2015 Q3 Bulletin 
4 According to IMF Article IV Consultation Press Release from September 2015, the reported headline inflation was 
a result of rising food prices due to below average rainfall, while non-food inflation was approaching 10 percent. 
2012 / 
2013
2013 / 
2014
Q3 
2015
2012 / 
2013
2013 / 
2014
Q3 
2015
2012 / 
2013
2013 / 
2014
Q3 
2015
Banks
19
      
19
     
19
    
1,728
 
2,208
 
2,636
 
23
     
26
      
30.5
Private
16
       
16
     
16
     
859
     
1,205
  
1,526
  
11.3
   
14.6
    
16.8
State-owned
3
         
3
       
3
      
869
     
1,003
  
1,110
  
12
      
11.8
    
13.7
MFIs
31
      
31
     
33
    
n/a
n/a
1,593
4.5
    
5.6
     
6.6
   
Insurance Companies
16
      
17
     
17
    
273
    
332
    
369
    
1.5
    
2
        
2.5
   
Private
15
       
16
     
16
     
224
     
270
     
n/a
1.1
     
1.6
      
2
      
State-owned
1
         
1
       
1
      
49
      
62
       
n/a
0.4
     
0.4
      
0.5
   
Institutions
Branches
Total Capital 
(Billion Birr)
 
10
11. 
Domestic credit has declined over time, as a share of the economy, as a result of low 
real interest rates, from 35.7 percent of GDP in 2004 to 28.6 percent of GDP in 2014. This 
demonetization trend is mirrored in a similar decline of broad money (M2) as a share of GDP, 
which declined from 38.5 percent in 2004 to 25.6 percent in 2011/125. Credit growth has been 
increasingly concentrated in public projects rather than private ones. The share of private credit 
in total outstanding credit has declined from 37 percent in 2007/08 to 30 percent in 2014/15. 
Conversely, the share of loans to State Owned Enterprises increased from 21 to 62 percent over 
this period (while the share of credit to Central Government in total outstanding credit declined 
from 42 to 8 percent). In terms of share of GDP, private sector credit declined from about 16 to 
11 percent of GDP in 2004–14, according to the NBE definition, which counts all DBE loans as 
private. 
12. 
The microfinance sector is promising, albeit highly concentrated and facing a 
number of challenges. Ethiopia has a strong presence of microfinance institutions (MFIs), credit 
cooperatives, savings and credit organizations, and rural finance associations. By Q3 2015, there 
were 33 MFIs regulated by the NBE, which mobilized a total saving deposit of ETB 14.2 
billion/US$665 million (40 percent higher than last year) and an outstanding credit of ETB 18.7 
billion/US$888 million6 (32 percent higher than last year). Their total assets increased by 28 
percent to ETB 29 billion / US$1.4 billion by the end of March 2015.7 All these indicators show 
the growing contributions of MFIs to poverty reduction both in rural and urban areas through 
their focus on low income segments of the society. However, the MFI sector is highly 
concentrated. Five major institutions (all owned by different regional governments, operating 
in different regions and therefore not competing with each other), namely Amhara, Dedebit, 
Oromiya, Omo and Addis Credit and Savings Institutions, accounted for 83.8 percent of the 
total capital, 93.7 percent of the savings, 89.8 percent of the credit and 90.4 percent 
of the total assets of the MFIs. Despite the growth in the sector, the sector faces a number of 
challenges, which include but are not limited to funding constraints, high operational costs, 
deficient management information systems, and limited management capacity/expertise.  
13. 
Capital markets in Ethiopia are mainly comprised of treasury bills and government 
bonds. Treasury bills are transacted on a weekly basis while government bonds are occasionally 
issued. Maturities of T-Bills range from 28, 91,182 and 364 days; 91 days and 364 days are the 
most demanded terms. In December 2014, the country joined Ghana, Kenya, Senegal and Ivory 
Coast in issuing the first dollar bond raising US$1 billion in 10-year bond to fund infrastructure 
related projects for industrial zones and sugar industry sectors.8 Corporate bond market remained 
underdeveloped whereby merely only few public institutions and regional governments 
participate. Ethiopian Electric Power (EEP), Railways Corporation and Addis Ababa Housing 
Development Agency accounted for 72.7 percent, 14 percent and 13.2 percent of the total 
corporate bonds issued. The sole purchaser of these bonds is the CBE. As of March 2015, the 
stock of corporate bonds held by CBE stood at ETB 136.6 billion / US$6.8 billion.  
                                                 
5 Getnet Alemu Zwedu, Financial Inclusion, regulation and inclusive growth in Ethiopia, ODI working paper 408 
6 FX Rate as of 9/30/15: US$1 = ETB 21.05. Source: www.xe.com 
7 FX Rate as of 3/31/15: US$1 = ETB 20.43. Source: www.xe.com 
8 Deutsche Bank and J.P. Morgan were managing the bond sale. 
 
11
14. 
The majority of Ethiopians rely on financial services offered outside the regulated 
financial system. According to 2014 Global Findex9 published by the World Bank (and used to 
inform the Ethiopia’s National Financial Inclusion Strategy), only 22 percent of Ethiopians 
owned a bank account at a formal financial institution, compared to the Sub-Saharan regional 
average of 34 percent. There is a large untapped market of borrowers and savers in Ethiopia that 
are not using financial services offered by regulated financial institutions. For instance, 44 
percent of Ethiopian adults borrowed within the last year, but only 7 percent borrowed from 
regulated financial institutions. Similarly, while 48 percent of Ethiopian adults reported saving or 
setting money aside, only 14 percent saved at a regulated financial institution. Since 2008, the 
national savings rate of Ethiopia has been growing significantly. National savings which was 
22.9 percent of GDP in 2008 has subsequently been rising and reached 31.7 percent of GDP in 
2014, surpassing the SSA by about 10 percentage points. The unprecedented growth in the 
savings rate since 2008 is due to the rise in domestic savings. A national account revision in 
2011 effectively doubled the domestic savings rate from 7.6 percent in 2011 (old estimate) to 
14.2 percent (new estimate). Still, increasing domestic savings has been identified as a priority 
area within the GoE’s newest Growth and Transformation Plan - GTP II. Annex 7 provides a 
detailed overview of the savings mobilization practice in Ethiopia.  
15. 
Beyond the individual and household level, access to finance is also a constraint for 
micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs). According to the World Bank Enterprise 
Survey (2011), 31.1 percent of firms identify access to credit as a major business constraint in 
Ethiopia (compared to 40.8 percent in SSA). Although 94.7 percent of all firms and 92.9 percent 
of small firms have access to a checking or savings account, only 15.8 percent have a bank loan 
or line of credit. Only 6 percent of micro enterprises, 1.9 percent of small enterprises, and 20.5 
percent of medium enterprises have a loan or a line of credit.10 Overall, business investments in 
Ethiopia are primarily financed internally (86 percent), compared to 8.2 percent by banks, 4.8 
percent through equity or stock sales, or 0.2 percent from supplier credit. In addition, collateral 
requirements remain high at around 200 percent of loan amount.  
16. 
Despite significant improvement in outreach led by the expansion of the banks’ 
branch network in the past year, penetration of regulated financial institutions remains 
very limited, particularly in rural areas. The number of bank branches in Ethiopia increased to 
2,636 as of March 2015 and, according to GTP II targets, is supposed to double by 2020. 
Nevertheless, the country lags behind the regional trends with only 2.9 bank branches per 
100,000 adults and only 0.3 ATMs per 100,000 adults compared to the SSA average of 4.5 and 
3.4, respectively. While around 80 percent of the population lives in rural areas, access points 
remain concentrated in the capital city; 35.4 percent of total bank branches and 53.4 of insurance 
companies’ branches are located in Addis Ababa. Thus, the long distances to regulated financial 
institutions present a barrier to account ownership for the rural population. 
                                                 
9 The Findex database is a global database and survey that provides the world’s most comprehensive database on 
financial inclusion. The survey provides in depth data on how individuals save, borrow, make payments, and 
manage risks. Developed and managed by the World Bank, collected in partnership with the Gallup World Poll, and 
funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the Global Findex is based on interviews with about 150,000 adults 
in over 140 countries. 
10 SME Finance in Ethiopia: Addressing the missing middle challenge, WBG. 
 
12
17. 
Ethiopia has made positive strides in financial sector infrastructure lately but it needs 
to be enhanced to promote financial intermediation. With the help of World Bank projects11, a 
modern national payments system and public credit information system were established recently. 
However, only 0.2 percent of the adult population is covered in the credit registry. There is no 
private credit bureau that can provide value added services on credit information such as credit 
scoring, marketing service, application processing and portfolio monitoring to facilitate quality 
decision making on credit provision by financial institutions and thereby minimize fraud and 
mitigate risks. Ethiopia does not have a registry for security interests in movable assets such as 
equipment, machinery, inventory and account receivables hampering secured lending over 
movables. Contract enforcement is also challenging adding to the risks for lenders to grant credit. 
Analytical Background for the Operation 
18. 
The recently completed “Ethiopia SME Finance Study 2014” represents the 
analytical background for the proposed operation. The study, initiated at a request of the 
GoE, looks at (the lack of) SME finance as one of the possible obstacles to job creation. Through 
the combination of a demand-side and a supply-side analysis, the study demonstrates the 
existence of a so-called “missing middle” phenomenon in Ethiopia, whereby small enterprises 
are more credit constrained than either micro or medium/large enterprises. The study highlights 
the inadequateness of Ethiopian banks’ business models to address the financing needs of SMEs 
and the existence of severe limitations in the overall enabling environment for SME lending (e.g. 
the lack of a collateral registry; an underutilized credit information system and an inefficient 
insolvency and creditor/debtor regime).12 The study also highlights the importance of lease 
finance as a complementary source of funding.13 Leasing can be an effective mechanism for 
boosting the Ethiopian economy by providing long-term finance to SMEs which need funds to 
expand but often do not have the credit history or collateral sufficient for credit from 
conventional financing sources. Annex 7 provides a summary of the main findings from the 
study. 
19. 
The GoE has recently prioritized growing lease financing and is in the process of 
establishing the necessary legal and regulatory foundation to support its development. 
Although leasing legislation and/or mention of it as a financial product has been around since 
1998 in Ethiopia, institutions only began offering finance leases locally in 2014. The Capital 
Goods Leasing Business Proclamation 103/1998 as amended by the Capital Goods Leasing 
Business (Amendment) Proclamation 807/2013 are the two major pieces of legislations 
regarding leasing. The current regulatory framework for leasing is considered one of the most 
advanced and a best practice in the region. The related tax environment is also considered as 
conducive for leasing business. In March / April 2014, the GoE through the National Bank of 
Ethiopia (NBE) licensed five regional independent leasing companies to commence business in 
capital goods finance and hire purchase transactions with the objective of building a strong and 
                                                 
11 Financial Sector Capacity Building Project (P094704); Improving the Efficiency of Payments System Project 
(P149104); Cheque Standardization Project (P132042). 
12 The study has been well received by the key counterparts in the GoE and by all the major financial and private 
sector stakeholders, as confirmed by the dissemination event held on February 2015 in Addis Ababa. A detailed 
summary of the main findings is provided in Annex 7. 
13 The Leasing Proclamation No 103/1998 has been recently amended by Proclamation No 807/2013 that provides 
licensing and supervisory authority to National Bank of Ethiopia for finance leasing and hire-purchase leasing. 
 
13
viable leasing sector in Ethiopia. All the five newly established leasing companies have met the 
ETB 200 million (US$10 million equivalent) minimum capital entry requirement and are 
regulated by NBE. The WBG/IFC is currently providing technical assistance to the NBE in 
drafting all the necessary leasing directives and guidelines to supervise and regulate the leasing 
market in Ethiopia. Five (out of 15 drafted) directives have been completed and approved by the 
NBE so far. Ten of the Directives were reviewed in January 2016 by NBE and the WB/IFC 
leasing team. It will take approximately six months to one year for the management and Board of 
NBE to approve the rest of the Directives. Similarly, risk management guidelines and risk-based 
supervision procedures manual are also under review and discussion. Both deliverables are 
expected to be completed by June 2016 with the technical support of the WBG/IFC.  
20. 
The sectors likely to benefit from capital goods financing in Ethiopia are enterprises 
producing goods and services for export and import substituting enterprises as well as 
enterprises capable of creating large employment opportunities. In Ethiopia, the leasing 
companies are expected to provide lease finance for machineries and equipment to the priority 
areas such as: (a) textile, garment, leather and leather products; (b) metal and wood works; (c) 
agro- processing, including dairy and poultry equipment; (d) construction machineries; (e) 
irrigation;(e) wet and dry coffee processing; (f) post-harvest grain processing including seed 
cleaning equipment; and (g) freight transporters from fields to market centers and warehouses, 
(h) farm and non-farm cooperatives, unions, and model farmers.  
21. 
In Ethiopia, capital goods financing includes financial lease and hire purchase but 
excludes operating lease. In a financial lease, the lessor retains full ownership until the end of 
the contract when the lessee can exercise the option to purchase the asset at an agreed price 
(residual value). In a hire purchase contract, there is a pro rata transfer of ownership upon 
payment of each rental instalment and only upon payment of the last instalment is ownership 
automatically transferred to the lessee. While ownership may change at some point from the 
lessor to lessee, the ‘legal title and certain rights’ over the asset still remains with the lessor. 
Therefore, even after ownership has changed by over 51 percent and there is default or non-
payment by the lessee, the lessor could seek redress through the Ministry of Industry (MoI) and 
then exercise the ‘right to repossess.’ The proclamations also provide for the parties to clearly 
agree on the manner by which ownership rights and claims shall be settled between the parties, 
in case there is an early termination of the hire purchase agreements. Where the lessee defaults 
and does not comply with demands from the lessor to remedy the default, the lessor shall rescind 
the contract, repossess the capital goods and claim damages. The proclamations empower the 
MoI to register capital goods agreements, and amendments, modifications and termination of 
agreements. The MoI shall take appropriate measures to ensure return of capital goods leased, 
and may order the police to execute the repossession.  
22. 
In established leasing markets, there is typically an orderly process for repossession. 
The first step in default would be to take possession of leased equipment or to repossess to 
mitigate against the level of risk. The next steps are to safe-keep the leased equipment in a 
warehouse and then sell it to a third party in a secondary market. (This is an internal process by 
the lessor). Regardless of any given challenges in repossession, international experience suggests 
that a secondary market for leased equipment should become active once the leasing business 
starts in any given economy even for specialized equipment. Lessors are always advised and 
 
14
encouraged to identify potential secondary markets for specialized equipment. Further details on 
default risk and repossession in Ethiopia are described in Annex 7. 
23. 
The current secured transactions system of Ethiopia provides a multitude of 
different and conflicting rules that complicate secured lending over movables. The existing 
legal framework that covers secured lending in Ethiopia is primarily included in the Civil and 
Commercial Codes, Civil Coded of Procedures and Foreclosure Proclamation. Some weaknesses 
in the current system include: (a) the lack of a single law covering all transactions secured by 
movable property; (b) non-possessory pledges which exist only as exceptions and not as a rule; 
(c) the law does not allow the granting of a security interest in future assets; (d) only some types 
of security interests are subject to registration, creating, therefore, a system with secret liens that 
is difficult and costly for creditors to discover; and (e) extrajudicial foreclosure is not available 
for all types of creditors.  
24. 
In Ethiopia, the majority of finance provided by banking institutions is secured with 
both immovable and movable assets. Unsecured credit is granted on an extremely limited basis 
to longtime clients who have demonstrated earnings equivalent to 100 percent of the loan for the 
past two years and who have been given a high ranking based on the bank’s credibility 
indicators. While the institutions interviewed disclosed a slight preference for taking immovable 
property as collateral, most institutions accept movable collateral as well. Movable collateral is 
largely represented by vehicles and 90 percent of the total movable collateral reported to the 
Credit Reference Bureau is of this type.14 While machinery and equipment are also commonly 
accepted, banking institutions revealed they are reluctant to take fluctuating assets, such as 
accounts receivables and inventory, as movable collateral. One of the main reasons Ethiopian 
banking institutions consider movable collateral a higher risk is the lack of a single movable 
property registry. In Ethiopia, there are several registries in which interests in certain types of 
movable collateral can be registered depending on the type of asset. These registries are located 
throughout the different regions of the country and are not linked, thus the information registered 
within each registry is not automatically shared with the other regional offices. 
25. 
Overall, the stakeholders welcome the idea of a single nationwide electronic registry 
for all types of collateral as long as it is reliable. Creditors indicated that they would be willing 
to extend credit by taking collateral in property currently not being lent upon, such as agricultural 
products, if there was a clear system that would provide them with legal certainty. Likewise, civil 
servants interviewed indicated that there is a need to extend secured credit and collateralize all 
possible assets in order to promote and expand businesses.  
Development Bank of Ethiopia 
26. 
The Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE) is a specialized financial institution 
established to promote the national development agenda through development finance. The 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation (MoFEC) represents the GoE as sole shareholder 
in DBE. MoFEC liaises with DBE in relation to the Bank’s capital position and is represented on 
the Board of

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

nk has supported the institutional development of DBE. In 2012 as 
part of WEDP, the World Bank conducted an assessment of DBE’s compliance with World Bank 
requirements for financial intermediary financing projects.17 The assessment confirmed DBE’s 
eligibility, provided that it strengthened its capacity in several key areas, including risk 
management, human capital, loan process, and IT/MIS. Between April 2013 and June 2014, 
WEDP funded technical assistance to work with DBE senior management in the design and 
implementation of an institutional development plan. A summary of the most recent due 
diligence of DBE along with progress with implementation of the institutional development plan 
are summarized further below (under Appraisal Summary).  
                                                 
15 FX Rate as of 6/30/14: US$1 = ETB 19.63. Source: www.xe.com 
16 Current disbursement levels are not available since DBE does not currently segment its portfolio by the size or 
type of borrower and does not differentiate between public and private ownership of projects.  
17 Then governed by OP 8.30, which has since been replaced by OP 10.00-financial intermediary financing. The new 
assessment of DBE is based on OP 10.00. 
 
16
C. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes 
31. 
The proposed Ethiopia SME Finance Project is fully aligned with the priorities set 
out in the FY13–FY16 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) and the subsequent CPS 
Progress Report and contributes to their objectives. The CPS explicitly calls for “increasing 
competitiveness in manufacturing and services, and SME access to financial services” as one of 
the key outcomes under its Pillar One. The CPS progress report noted results in this area, 
reconfirming this objective. The proposed operation addresses the provision of term18 finance in 
local currency through eligible participating financial institutions (PFIs) to expand outreach to 
urban and rural SMEs, thereby addressing the liquidity gap and facilitating sustainable access to 
finance to SMEs. In doing so the project is taking a comprehensive approach by addressing 
broader impediments to access to finance by: (a) incentivizing the financial system to deepen the 
provision of sustainable financial services to SMEs (i.e. through technical assistance to financial 
intermediaries to deploy novel lending techniques to reach SMEs); (b) by supporting investment 
in financial infrastructure (i.e. collateral registry, insolvency and creditor/debtor regime); and (c) 
addressing bankability constraints of the SMEs thorough provision of technical assistance, 
especially on business development. The proposed approach and project objectives are highly 
relevant to priorities identified in the CPS.

A. PDO 
32. 
The project development objective is to increase access to finance for Eligible Small and 
Medium Enterprises in the Recipient’s territory19. 
Project Beneficiaries 
33. 
The final project beneficiaries will be eligible SMEs operating in the manufacturing 
and agro-processing industries. Moreover, for those SMEs receiving leasing finance, or 
working capital linked to leasing finance, and/or business development services also tour and 
construction industries will be allowed in line with the priority areas for SMEs indicated in the 
Lease Financing Policy for SMEs (Code-DBE/03/2007)20. SMEs in the tour and construction 
industries will not be eligible to receive working capital only.  
34. 
Definition of “SMEs”: the definition of SMEs adopted by the project will be aligned to 
the one contained in the Lease Financing Policy for SMEs (Code-DBE/03/2007) in terms of 
minimum number of employees (i.e. above 6). The project will also fix the maximum number of 
employees per SME at 100. Moreover, under Component 1, working capital loans to SMEs will 
be limited to a maximum of Birr 10 million, while lease finance loans will be aligned with the 
Lease Financing Policy requirements: i.e. a maximum lease loan size of Birr 30 million. The 
                                                 
18 Can include maturities up to 10 years 
19 “Eligible SME” means a small and medium enterprise established and operating in Ethiopia which meets the 
eligibility criteria contained in the Operations Manual. 
20 Article 2.1.1 of the Lease Financing Policy for SMEs indicates that priority areas for SMEs are (a) Agricultural 
project; (b) Agro-processing industries; (c) Manufacturing Industries; (d) Tour Industries; (e) Construction 
industries; (f) Mining and Quarries. Agricultural project as well as Mining and Quarries however are excluded from 
the project beneficiaries’ sectors due to higher risk of potential negative impact on the environment. 
 
17
policy also indicates that DBE will be focusing on direct provision of lease finance for SMEs in 
need of loans from Birr 1–30 million, while lease companies will serve SMEs with lease finance 
needs of below Birr 1 million.  
35. 
Moreover, the project will benefit participating financial institutions (i.e. lease 
companies, commercial banks and MFIs), local business development service providers and 
government agencies like DBE (including DBE branches), NBE and MoI. In particular: 
(a) SMEs will benefit from improved access to finance for leasing and working capital 
loans; from dedicated business development services and from improvements to the 
financial infrastructure for SME finance (e.g. collateral registry).  
(b) Participating Financial Institutions will benefit from receiving technical 
assistance (externally funded) aimed at enhancing their capacity to sustainably serve 
the SME sector under the proposed project.  
(c) Local Business Development Service (BDS) Providers will benefit through 
capacity building and support to better assist and provide services and training to 
SMEs.  
(d) Government Agencies will benefit from institutional strengthening and capacity 
building to facilitate the provision of financial and non-financial services to SMEs 
and by improving the necessary financial sector infrastructure. 
PDO Level Results Indicators 
36. 
The progress towards the PDO will be measured by the following indicators: (a) Volume 
of Financial Support to SMEs under the credit facility; (b) Number of SMEs reached with 
financial services under the credit facility; and (c) Portfolio Quality under the credit facility. 
Proposed intermediate indicators are also detailed which help to achieve the PDO targets. The 
details are discussed in Annex 1.

A. Project Components 
37. 
The SME Finance project will have four components: (a) Component 1: Financial 
Services to SMEs; (b) Component 2: Enabling Environment for SME Finance; (c) Component 3: 
Business Development Services to SMEs; (d) Component 4: Project Management, 
Communication and Impact Evaluation. Diagram 1 below provides the project overview.  
 
18
Figure 1. Project Overview 
  
Component 1: Financial Services to SMEs 
38. 
The objective of the first component is to establish a credit facility providing access 
to finance for (a) working capital and leasing finance for participating financial institutions 
(PFIs) which in turn lend to eligible SMEs and (b) leasing finance for eligible SMEs. This 
liquidity support will be complemented with mandatory technical assistance aimed at supporting 
PFIs in designing, piloting and rolling out financial products utilizing novel lending 
methodologies (e.g. cash flow-based lending) to successfully expand their outreach to the target 
SMEs. The technical assistance support will be funded externally through bilateral agreements 
with development partners. 
39. 
DBE will provide both direct financing to SMEs and wholesale finance to other 
financial intermediaries for on-lending to SMEs. More specifically, DBE will in parallel serve 
as: (a) direct lender of lease finance to SMEs through its regional branch network; (b) wholesaler 
of finance to participating lease companies for provision of lease finance to SMEs; and (c) 
wholesaler for commercial banks and MFIs focused on provision of working capital finance to 
SMEs. It will do so through two main financing windows: 
 
Window 1: Lease finance to SMEs. This window will provide a line of credit to 
strengthen DBE’s capacity to provide lease finance to SMEs both directly through 
its regional branches and indirectly through the licensed and eligible lease 
companies operating in the country. DBE, as a retailer through its regional branches, 
will provide lease financing directly for amounts greater than ETB 1 million and 
indirectly to eligible lease companies for amounts less than ETB 1 million. Tailored 
and compulsory technical assistance will be provided to DBE branches and to the 
participating lease companies (see TA facility below) on how to properly address 
SMEs’ needs in the regions where they operate, as well as enhancing their skills on 
 
19
risk management, product design, management information systems (MIS), funding 
strategy, and other needs as appropriate. 
 
Window 2: SME lending. This window will provide a wholesale line of credit from 
DBE to eligible commercial banks and MFIs for on-lending of working capital 
finance to eligible SMEs. Similar to the leasing window, a tailored and compulsory 
technical assistance (see TA facility below) will be provided to commercial banks 
and MFIs on how to reengineer their business models so that they can lend to SMEs 
in a sustainable fashion. This approach has been very successful in several other 
countries (e.g. Turkey and China), and it has completely changed the attitude of the 
financial sector players towards SMEs.21  
40. 
A TA facility (funded externally through development partners) will be established 
to complement and reinforce project implementation. A critical success factor and a key goal 
of the project are to build the institutional and human resource capacity of DBE and of the PFIs 
to effectively serve the SME market. The TA Facility will be closely coordinated with the Credit 
Facility. The DFID-funded Private Enterprise Project for Ethiopia (PEPE)22 will be responsible 
for funding and managing the TA facility, under the technical supervision of the World Bank 
team. 
41. 
In order to have access to the Credit Facility, PFIs will be required to enter into 
technical cooperation agreements (TCA) with the PMT in DBE and with PEPE. These 
agreements will build on the outcomes of initial diagnostic review of PFIs where their technical 
assistance needs will be defined. Under such agreements, PFIs will receive TA free of charge for a 
period deemed appropriate after the initial gap assessment for building the necessary capacity to 
undertake the project’s assignment. However, the PFIs will commit to adopting internal structures, 
staffing and systems consistent with servicing the targets SME market under the project. 
Component 2: Enabling Environment for SME Finance  
42. 
The objective of the second component is to improve the enabling environment for 
facilitating SME finance in Ethiopia23. This would require the following: 
 
creation of a collateral registry that would support both the lending and the leasing 
business; 
 
a diagnostic of the insolvency and creditor/debtor regime to address key 
bottlenecks to SME lending;  
                                                 
21 In these countries, mandatory changes to banks’ business models included: the creation of an SME department 
within each participating bank, the creation of decentralized credit committees, and the introduction of a purpose-
designed quality assurance process. The TA was provided free of charge to the participating institutions for two 
years. 
22 The Private Enterprise Program Ethiopia (PEPE) is an existing DFID-funded project designed to support access to 
finance for small and medium sized businesses and to support productivity and growth in the horticulture, leather 
and textiles sectors in order to raise incomes and create jobs 
23 This component will be closely coordinated with the technical assistance that will be provided in the area of 
financial sector infrastructure by Ethiopia Financial Inclusion Support Framework (FISF) and Multi Donor Initiative 
(MDI), both managed by the WBG. 
 
20
43. 
The project will support the hardware and associated software requirements, 
licenses, capacity building and training for a centralized electronic collateral registry. 
Collateral registries for movable assets, which are part of the broader secured transactions 
systems,24 fulfill two key functions:25 notify parties about the existence of a security interest in 
movable property (of existing liens) and establish the priority of creditors vis-à- vis third 
parties.26 In Ethiopia, it has been identified that a collateral registry is one of the key areas of 
development for improving Ethiopia’s financial infrastructure, thereby facilitating access to 
finance, especially for the SME sector. This registry is expected to be: (a) the only place where 
security interests over movables are registered following necessary legal reforms; (b) cost-
efficient; (c) designed as a notice-filing system; and (d) accessible exclusively by electronic 
means.  
44. 
The main purpose of the diagnostic review on insolvency and credit/debtor regime is 
to analyze and identify the areas for improvement in the country’s insolvency and 
credit/debtor systems. Insolvency systems provide a pre-determined set of rules and institutions 
concerned with the recognition of insolvency, the resultant liquidation or rehabilitation of the 
insolvent firm, and the allocation of the financial consequences between the stakeholders. They 
also permit lenders to more accurately price risk and encourage cash flow lending, rather than 
relationship or directed lending, and disciplines managers to allocate scarce resources efficiently. 
The assessment is designed to assess and compare a country’s institutional practices against the 
internationally recognized best practices and, if needed, provide recommendations for 
improvement in a prioritized methodology. The methodology of the diagnostic is based upon a 
pluralistic approach, which examines whether the goals of an efficient system are met and not 
how those goals are achieved.  
45. 
These activities complement ongoing technical assistance (including the improvement of 
legal and regulatory framework for leasing) which is currently funded through other 
development partners and elaborated upon in Box 2.1 of Annex 2.  
Component 3: Business Development Services to SMEs 
46. 
The objective of the third component is to support SMEs through the provision of 
tailored Business Development Services (BDS) to address constraints on the demand side.  
47. 
BDS support to SMEs can address (but is not limited to) the lack of capacity to 
develop bankable business plans, the poor quality of financial statements and records, the 
inability to manage risk, the lack of knowledge of business development and management, 
the lack of adequate collateral, etc. The main objective of the provision of BDS will be to 
                                                 
24 A Secured Transactions project consists of four components: (a) secured transactions law, applicable to all 
creditors and borrowers, (b) design and implementation of a centralized on-line collateral registry; (c) public 
awareness and capacity building efforts; and (d) monitoring and impact measurement of the project.  
25 Alvarez de la Campa, Alejandro, 2011. Increasing Access to Credit through Reforming Secured Transactions in 
the MENA Region. Policy Research Working Paper 5613. 
26 Specifically, three conditions are required for banks to be able to accept movable assets as collateral: the creation 
of security interest, the perfection of security interest and the enforcement of security interest (see Fleisig, Heywood, 
Mehnaz Safavian, Nuria de la Peña, 2006. Reforming Collateral Laws to Expand Access to Finance. World Bank. 
Washington DC). The movable collateral registry is a necessary component as it allows for the “perfection” of 
security interest. 
 
21
make SMEs more bankable. BDS services may include business management and 
entrepreneurship training, business plan development, marketing strategy, human resource 
management, financial systems and bookkeeping. It may also include tailored coaching and 
mentoring support depending on the needs and the capacity of the SMEs. A consulting firm 
would be identified through an international competitive bidding process to carry out an 
assessment of the specific needs of the target SMEs, and support the PIU in developing the 
Terms of Reference and criteria for the selection of BDS providers. It is anticipated that high 
caliber local BDS providers will then provide a tailored menu of trainings and mentorship to the 
SMEs.  
48. 
In addition to the standard BDS, the project will also aim at providing highly 
specialized services to growth-oriented SMEs capable of becoming suppliers for global 
value chains. In particular, this set of services will link the local producers to international 
markets through global value chains, product development management and compliance with 
international market standards. Moreover, it will focus on quality assurance processes and 
management information systems (e.g. software that could help SMEs manage their production 
cycle in a more systematic and efficient manner).27 As these proposed advisory services are more 
of a specialized technical nature and do not fall within the scope of a standard business training 
package, they would be provided directly to SMEs by an internationally-selected firm, with 
expertise in these technical areas. This specialized activity is expected to be coordinated under 
this project but financed through external/ donors grant funding. 
Component 4: Project Management, Communication and Impact Evaluation 
49. 
The objective of the fourth component is to support overall coordination of project 
activities, and to rigorously measure the impact of the project on the growth of 
participating SMEs. 
50. 
The two main implementers of the project will be the Development Bank of Ethiopia 
(DBE) and the Ministry of Industry (MoI). A Project Management Team (PMT) will be 
established in DBE with the direct responsibility of managing the credit facility under 
Component 1. A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established under the MoI with the 
mandate of overall project’s coordination and direct responsibility of Components 2, 3 and 4. 
NBE will assign a focal person that will act as the key technical referent of the PIU for 
Component 2. The PIU will be housed under the Domestic Investors Transformation Directorate 
(DITD) at MoI that reports directly to the Minister of Industry. At the regional level, the regional 
SME development offices (ReMSEDAs) will serve as entry points.  
51. 
The impact evaluation will focus on innovation and measurement with the 
beneficiaries of loans and BDS. The project’s impact evaluation will support rigorous empirical 
analysis based on a quantitative comparison of a treatment and control groups before and after 
access to specific project interventions. Empirical analysis will typically build on survey data 
deliberately collected for this purpose: (1) a base-line survey which will be carried out prior to 
respondents' exposure to any relevant intervention activities; (2) an end-line survey which will be 
                                                 
27 While the project cannot provide software to SMEs, the team has agreed to explore the possibility of conducting a 
needs assessment, to find the gaps in the existing software that the SMEs are using, and to introduce some existing 
solutions that the SMEs could acquire on their own in case of their interests and needs.