[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 36229 chars (48.3% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. 
Country Context 
1. 
Ethiopia is a large and diverse country. It is located in the Horn of Africa and is a land-
locked country with an area of 1.1 million km2. Its bio-physical environment includes a variety 
of contrasting ecosystems, with significant differences in climate, soil properties, vegetation 
types, agricultural potential, biodiversity and water resources. Ethiopia is also a country of many 
nations, nationalities and peoples, with a total population of about 87.9 million and a population 
growth rate of 2.6 percent (2013). Only 17 percent of the population lives in urban centers, the 
great majority of them in Addis Ababa. At a current annual growth rate of 2.6 percent, Ethiopia’s 
population is estimated to reach 130 million by 2025. Ethiopia is projected by the United Nations 
(UN) to be among the ten largest countries by population in 2050. The country is vulnerable to 
terms of trade shocks from international food and fuel prices and to large domestic weather-
related shocks as demonstrated by the 2011/12 East Africa droughts. 
 
2. 
Ethiopia has a federal, democratic government system, established in the early 1990’s 
with nine autonomous states (‘regions’) and two city administrations. Decentralization of 
governance to the regional and district (Woreda) levels has been actively pursued since 2003. 
The Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) has been in power since 
1991. EPRDF comprises four regionally based parties from the four major regions (Amhara, 
Oromia, Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples’ Region (SNNPR) and Tigray). The next 
national elections are scheduled for mid-2015. 
 
3. 
Ethiopia has experienced strong economic growth, averaging 10.7 percent per year 
between 2003 and 2011 compared to the regional average of 5.0 percent. GDP increased by 9.7 
percent in 2012/13 and 10.3 percent in 2013/14. The growth reflects a mix of factors, including 
agricultural modernization, the development of new export sectors, strong global commodity 
demand and government-led development investments. Private consumption and public 
investment have driven demand side growth, with the latter assuming an increasingly important 
role in recent years. On the supply side, growth was driven by an expansion of the services and 
agricultural sectors, while the role of the industrial sector was relatively modest. Recently, 
annual growth rates have declined slightly, but still remain at high single-digit levels. Growth in 
the export of goods has also moderated in recent years and a decline was observed in 2012/13 for 
the first time since 2008/09. There have been bouts of high inflation in recent years and while 
inflation is currently much lower at present, keeping it down remains a major objective for 
monetary policy. 
 
4. 
Ethiopia is one of the world's poorest countries, but has made substantial progress on 
social and human development over the past decade. The country’s per capita income of US$470 
(2013) is substantially lower than the regional average of US$1,257 and is the ninth lowest 
worldwide. Ethiopia is ranked 173 out of 187 countries in the Human Development Index (HDI) 
of the United Nations Development Program (UNDP). High economic growth, however, has 
helped reduce poverty in both urban and rural areas. Since 2005, 2.5 million people have been 
lifted out of poverty and the share of the population below the poverty line has fallen from 38.7 
percent in 2004/05 to 29.6 percent in 2010/11 (using a poverty line of close to US$1.25/day). 
However, because of high population growth the absolute number of poor (about 25 million) has 
 
2
remained unchanged over the past fifteen years. Ethiopia is among the countries that have made 
the fastest progress on the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and HDI ranking over the 
past decade. It is on track to achieve the MDGs for gender parity in education, child mortality, 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (HIV/AIDS) and 
malaria. Reduction of maternal mortality remains a key challenge. 
 
5. 
The GoE is currently implementing its ambitious Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP; 
2010/11-2014/15), which sets a long-term goal of becoming a middle-income country by 2025, 
with growth rates of at least 11.2 percent per annum during the plan period. To achieve the GTP 
goals and objectives, GoE has followed a “developmental state” model with a strong role for the 
government in many aspects of the economy. It has prioritized key sectors such as industry and 
agriculture as drivers of sustained economic growth and job creation. The GTP also reaffirms 
GoE’s commitment to human development. Development partners have programs that are 
broadly aligned with GTP priorities. 
 
6. 
The fast growing population of Ethiopia is a challenge to the reduction of poverty and 
shared prosperity, having increased by nearly fourfold over the last four decades. The capacity of 
the rural arable areas to support this population has reached its limit, as the average land holding 
of a rural household has become less than the hectare which is needed to sustain the current 
average family size and no more farm land is available for the youth. The population pressure 
has obliged the youth to migrate to urban centers to search for scarce job opportunities.  The 
population size of major cities benefiting from the proposed project, such as Hawassa, Batu 
(Zeway) and Addis Ababa has grown by six, nine and two fold respectively between the 1984 
and 2013 censuses. The official unemployment rate in urban centers is over 17 percent.  With a 
population of 3.1 million, Addis Ababa is 10 times larger than the other major cities in Ethiopia. 
This imbalance in urban populations is reflected in the smaller scale of economic activities and 
industrial growth in these other cities and the regions that surround them. The GoE has 
recognized the importance of cities in the country’s industrialization strategy. The second GTP, 
which is being prepared, will support the smaller cities in their role of increasing growth and 
reducing poverty. 
 
7. 
The World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, FY13-16) builds on the 
progress achieved by Ethiopia in recent years and aims to help GoE address structural 
transformation and assist in the implementation of the GTP. The CPS framework includes two 
pillars. Pillar One, “fostering competitiveness and employment”, aims to support Ethiopia in 
achieving: (a) a stable macroeconomic environment; (b) increased competitiveness and 
productivity; (c) increased and improved delivery of infrastructure; and d) enhanced regional 
integration.  Pillar Two, “enhancing resilience and reducing vulnerabilities”, aims to support 
Ethiopia in improving the delivery of social services and developing a comprehensive approach 
to social protection and risk management. Good governance and state building form the 
foundation of the CPS. In line with the GTP, gender and climate change have been included as 
cross-cutting issues to strengthen their mainstreaming across the portfolio. The programs of 
International Finance Corporation (IFC) and Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) 
are well aligned with the CPS framework, contributing mainly to the strategic objectives under 
Pillar One. 
 
 
3
B. 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
8. 
Transport sector policy definition and oversight in Ethiopia is the responsibility of the 
Ministry of Transport (MOT). The Ethiopian Roads Authority (ERA) is responsible for overall 
network planning and federal roads development, including high capacity roads. The Transport 
Authority is responsible for regulating transport services. The Office of the Road Fund (ORF) 
administers funds for road maintenance, which are collected through a fuel levy. The 
management of the lower levels of the road network is decentralized. Responsibility for road 
safety lies with the National Road Safety Council (NRSC), which reports to the MOT. In July 
2014, GoE established the Ethiopian Toll Roads Enterprise (ETRE), which has the responsibility 
of managing all toll roads in the country.  
 
9. 
The GoE, recognizing that the size and quality of the road network is a major constraint 
to economic growth and poverty reduction, has formulated a rolling Road Sector Development 
Program (RSDP) in partnership with development partners including the World Bank, African 
Development Bank (AfDB), China EXIM Bank, the European Union (EU) and the South Korea 
EXIM Bank. The RSDP identified the investments needed to restore and expand the road 
network, and reforms to modernize the sector. Since the RSDP was launched in 1997, the road 
network has increased from 26,550 km to 99,522 km today and 70 percent is now in good or fair 
condition compared with 22 percent at the start of the program. The current annual budget for the 
road sector is now US$1.7 billion, of which 74 percent was funded by GoE and 5 percent by the 
Bank in 2013. The ORF contributes about US$65 million annually to road maintenance. 
 
10. 
In addition to the rapid expansion and improvement of the road network, the sector has to 
overcome major challenges, including: (a) enhancing the GoE’s Road Safety strategy that targets 
reducing the accident rate from 74 to 27 fatalities per 10,000 vehicles by 2016; (b) constructing 
high capacity roads to improve safety and reduce congestion; and (c) improving institutional 
efficiency to ensure the delivery of projects within planned cost and time, and with acceptable 
levels of site safety. In 2013 ERA adopted a wide-ranging modernization agenda aimed at 
strengthening their capacity to deliver GoE’s road sector program. The proposed project will 
help to mainstream modernization of the roads network in the upcoming fifth phase of RSDP and 
in addition, addresses the critical challenges of enhancing cost sharing principles by recovering 
operation and maintenance costs and a part of investment costs. It will play an important role in 
supporting economic growth and will also provide a high standard road for road users, which 
will reduce road accidents and reduce fuel consumption, in turn reducing emissions. 
 
11. 
Due to the fast growing economy and expanding road network, traffic on roads radiating 
from Addis Ababa has grown at an average annual rate of 9.5 percent between 2003 and 2012, 
with heavy truck traffic increasing by 11.6 percent annually, leading to chronic congestion. The 
route to the port of Djibouti, Ethiopia’s main trade outlet, currently carries over 20,000 vehicles 
per day (vpd), and by 2022 traffic on seven principal routes is expected to exceed 10,000 vpd. In 
response, the Ethiopian Roads Authority (ERA) has constructed the Addis – Adama Expressway, 
a 78 km toll road on the Djibouti Corridor, which was opened to traffic in September 2014.  The 
Modjo-Hawassa road is sub divided in four sections, comprising 57 km in section 1, 37 km in 
section 2, 57 km in section 3 and 52 km in section 4, totaling 203 km. The road is part of the 
Trans-East African Highway linking Ethiopia to Kenya. GoE has secured financing for sections 
1 and 2 from the AfDB and Korea EXIM Bank respectively.  The World Bank will finance 
 
4
section 3 from Batu (Zeway) to Arsi Negele while China EXIM Bank will be financing section 4 
within the framework of the Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in support of 
projects in Africa, signed between the China EXIM Bank and IBRD/IDA in September 2013.  
 
12. 
The GTP prioritizes efficient transportation systems as critical for the transformation of 
the Ethiopian economy from an agriculture-rural base into one that relies increasingly on 
industry to lift the world’s most impoverished people out of poverty. The interconnection of the 
fast growing urban centers predominantly habited by poor people will facilitate agriculture based 
industrialization, access to large domestic and export markets, as well as promote services and 
tourism.  This project will facilitate the light manufacturing expansion planned for the Hawassa 
Special Economic Zone and along the corridor supported by the World Bank. In addition to the 
Addis-Adama and Modjo-Hawassa roads, Government is preparing plans to upgrade to 
expressway standard other congested roads that radiate from Addis Ababa and connect to the 
regional states.  This recognizes that high capacity highways and expressways will help increase 
the reliability and timely delivery of goods to higher level markets and for export, improve 
service delivery, move people at a reduced time and cost, reduce the incidence of road traffic 
crashes saving lives of pedestrian and passengers (the majority of them the poor) and the loss of 
property, and attract investment; in summary, facilitate growth that creates employment for the 
poor. Studies from China and India show that highway corridors attract firms to locate along the 
corridor, thereby bringing spatial and economic transformation of the corridors, as well as 
enhancing competiveness. Example of the impacts of highway development (the Golden 
Quadrilateral highway project) on the Indian organized manufacturing sector is presented in 
Box 1. 
  
Box 1. Impacts of the Golden Quadrilateral Highway Project  
on the Formal Manufacturing Sector in India1 
 
An evaluation of the impact of a large-scale highway project on economic activity in the manufacturing 
sector in India used establishment-level survey data from 1994-2007 for the Golden Quadrilateral 
Highway Project, which upgraded the quality and width of 5,846 km of highways linking four major hubs 
in India. The evaluation showed that this upgrade improved the connectivity and market accessibility of 
districts lying close to the highway compared to those further from it. Non-nodal districts located within 
0-10 km from the Golden Quadrilateral network experienced substantial increases in entry levels and 
higher productivities. Dynamic specifications and comparisons to the NS-EW highway system mostly 
confirm these findings, with the most substantial caveat being that the productivity gains may be 
upwardly biased by a pre-period dip.  
 
The Golden Quadrilateral upgrades also appear to have facilitated a more natural sorting of industries that 
are land and building intensive from the nodal districts into the periphery locations. The upgrades also 
appear to be encouraging decentralization by making intermediate cities more attractive for 
manufacturing entrants. 
 
 
                                                 
1  Highway to Success in India- The Impacts of the Golden Quadrilateral Highway Project for the Location and 
Performance of Manufacturing; Ejaz Ghani,  Arti Grover Goswami, and William R. Kerr; January 2013. The World 
Bank Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Network, Economic Policy and Debt Department. Policy 
Research Working Paper 6320  
 
5
C. 
Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes 
13. 
The project supports the Bank’s twin goals of reducing extreme poverty and enhancing 
shared prosperity, as it facilitates the growth of employment generating industries, tourism and 
agri-business through the provision of a direct high-quality road link to Addis Ababa and the sea 
port, and helps to reduce transport costs for local fishery and agricultural products marketed by 
the rural and urban poor living along the project influence area. The project is consistent with 
three of the objectives of Pillar One, of the Bank Group's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 
FY 2013-16, which aims to increase productivity, increase and improve delivery of 
infrastructure, and enhance regional integration. The project will support the Government’s 
RSDP by introducing effective strategies for managing high capacity roads and builds on the 
successes of the Bank’s support over many years to the road sector in Ethiopia. The project will 
promote Road Safety actions to reduce accidents along critical corridors and support institutional 
development.     
 
14. 
The GTP is promoting development initiatives that are distributed throughout the 
regional states, including investments in agro processing development and industrial zones in 
Addis Ababa, Dire Dawa, Hawassa and Kombolcha. The new Hawassa Special Economic Zone 
will focus on agro-industries, processing outputs from the surrounding region. The Southern 
Region of Ethiopia, which will be served by the proposed project, is densely populated and the 
resulting pressures are highly pronounced in this part of the country. However, the region is 
endowed with many tourist attractions such as lakes and parks, as well as potentially irrigable 
land and fishery resources.  Improving intercity connectivity between Hawassa and Addis Ababa 
through the establishment of an efficient and safe development corridor centered on the densely 
populated Modjo-Batu (Zeway)-Hawassa area will encourage investment in these cities. This 
will help increase formal employment in the satellite cities and surrounding areas that provide 
the raw materials for the agro-processing and light manufacturing industries along the corridor. 
By reducing journey time and transport cost to investments in the development corridor between 
Addis Ababa and Hawassa, the project will support the growth of employment generating 
urbanization.    
 
15. 
The proposed project is seen to support the core pillars of the “New Africa Strategy”, 
which are focused on: (a) improving competitiveness and employment; and (b) addressing 
vulnerability and promoting resilience, by improving key transport and trade corridors. 
Furthermore, the project will enhance the China EXIM Bank and World Bank cooperation 
intended to jointly support development projects helping to boost accelerated growth and poverty 
reduction in Africa. This project builds on the experience sharing between China and Ethiopia on 
expressway development.

A. 
PDO 
16. 
The objective of the Project is to enhance efficiency and safety in the movement of goods 
and people along the Batu (Zeway)-Arsi Negele section of the Modjo-Hawassa development 
 
6
corridor, whilst strengthening the Recipient’s institutional capacity to develop and manage high 
capacity highways and expressways.  
 
17. 
The proposed project helps to support the accelerated development of the country which 
is intended to lift out of poverty the 27 percent of the population currently living below the 
national poverty line by: (a) facilitating trade between Ethiopia and Kenya, as well as southern  
Africa, as the proposed road is an important segment of the Trans-East African Highway; (b) 
establishing an efficient inter-city corridor between the economic capital of the nation, Addis 
Ababa, and Hawassa to attract investment in light manufacturing and agro-processing to the 
southern region; (c) facilitating the export of agricultural produce, helping to strengthen the 
export base; (d) facilitating the marketing of their products by the rural poor, including farmers 
and small-scale fishermen; and (f) facilitating the tourism industry along the Modjo-Hawassa 
corridor and the National Parks in the south, which are providing employment to the local 
population. The project will set the strategic framework for future expressway and high capacity 
road development and instill efficiency in the management of such roads through cost recovery 
mechanisms and opportunities for increased private sector participation in infrastructure 
operation. The project will also support GoE’s program to improve road safety. 
 
18. 
The proposed project will add two important elements to the Bank’s support program to 
the transport sector through the introduction of innovative Intelligent Transportation Systems 
(ITS) and a scientific approach to reduction of road accidents and injuries – The Safe System. It 
is aimed at improving key national and regional corridors by separating long distance through 
traffic from the mixture of motorized and non-motorized traffic which is prevalent along existing 
corridors whilst contributing to asset management and sustainability issues not fully addressed 
through previous interventions. 
 
B. 
Project Beneficiaries 
19. 
Direct beneficiaries of the project include those people who live within the Woredas that 
are served by the target road section (Batu (Zeway)-Arsi Negele), road users, public transport 
operators and their customers, investors that will use the road, resort areas along the corridor, 
poor people who rely on fishery, commercial farms, agro processing and light manufacturing for 
their livelihoods, and ultimately, consumers and producers that are based within the project 
areas. The direct beneficiaries within the project influence area between Batu (Zeway) and Arsi 
Negele are estimated to be about 400,000 of which approximately 50 percent are female.  
 
20. 
Indirect beneficiaries will include the transport, logistics and supply industries, together 
with the people who live within the seven Woredas in the influence area of the entire Modjo-
Hawassa corridor, estimated at about 1.9 million. The project will benefit people in parts of the 
Oromia and SNNPR States, which will be involved in the GTP flagship projects including agro-
processing development.  The agro processing developments in the SNNPR, which are expected 
to create approximately 450,000 jobs while selling their products internally and for export will 
benefit from the reduced travel time and cost. Further, the project will benefit export and import 
commerce with Kenya and the Southern Africa countries.    
 
21. 
The primary social and economic benefits for the project area are anticipated to be: 
 
 
7
(a) 
Improved transport and freight facilities and faster delivery of goods and 
perishable produce, as well as facilitating the attraction of investment in light industry; 
 
(b) 
Improved opportunities for growth and development of tourism and agricultural 
outputs; 
 
(c) 
Creation of short-term employment during construction and in the longer term 
due to increased development and tourism, and the operation and maintenance of the new 
road; 
 
(d) 
Improved environmental outcomes due to reduction in vehicle emissions; and 
 
(e) 
Improved safety as a result of providing improved geometry and separation of 
through traffic from slow moving local traffic, non-motorized transport, and pedestrians.  
 
C. 
PDO Level Results Indicators 
22. 
Expected outcomes of the proposed project as a result of the new highway construction, 
institutional development support and promoting the implementation of the “Safe System” 
include: (a) a reduction in travel time between Batu (Zeway) and Arsi Negele; (b) a reduction in 
vehicle operating cost along the target project corridor; (c) a reduction in road accident fatalities 
along the Addis-Adama and Modjo-Hawassa road corridors; (d) expressways and high capacity 
highways with sustainable and efficient management systems; (e) the number of direct project 
beneficiaries (percentage of which are female), and (f) the production of annual reports on 
citizens’ engagement. 
 
23. 
Progress towards the attainment of the PDO will be assessed through the indicators 
described in the Results Framework - Annex 1.

A. 
Project Components 
24. 
The project will include the following components:   
 
25. 
Component 1: Construction of High Capacity Highway (US$340 million) including:  
 
26. 
Sub-component 1 (a): Constructing the Batu (Zeway) - Arsi Negele section of the new 
Modjo - Hawassa Highway, including support for livelihood restoration;  
 
27. 
Sub-component 1 (b): Monitoring and supervising the civil works to be carried out under 
sub-component 1 (a);  
 
28. 
Sub-component 1 (c): Supporting prioritized road safety improvement works at potential 
accident sites on the trunk road network and piloting the implementation of corridor based Road 
Safety actions along the high capacity highway and expressway network; and  
 
 
8
29. 
Sub-component 1 (d): Installation of relevant field Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) on 
the new Modjo-Hawassa highway and enhancing ITS on the expressway network. 
 
Component 2: Institutional Development and Regulatory Framework (US$18 million) - 
including:  
 
30. 
Sub-component 2 (a): Strengthening the Recipient’s capacity for the development of 
expressways and high capacity highways through: (i) advisory services and training for the 
preparation of a strategic master plan and regulatory and legal frameworks for financing, 
operation and maintenance of expressways and high capacity highways; and (ii) the development 
of a national and sub-national ITS conceptual framework, including preparation of a strategic 
plan for ITS development, and design of the systems engineering, for development and 
management of expressways and high capacity highways, and ITS for planning and road asset 
management. The strategic master plan and the regulatory and legal framework will, inter alia: 
encapsulate road financing strategies, private sector participation, systems for highway operation 
and maintenance, and the assessment of impacts. The institutional development support will help 
to strengthen the institutional base for the development of expressways and high capacity 
highways, as it targets the developer (ERA);  
 
31. 
Sub-component 2 (b): Strengthening functional units within the Ethiopian Toll Roads 
Enterprise for expressway and high capacity highway management, including, inter alia, 
strengthening the capacity of said functional units for digital roads management through the 
provision of advisory services, training and ITS, and other equipment for central expressway 
management; 
 
32. 
Sub-component 2 (c): Undertaking studies and making recommendations on how to 
monitor and strengthen governance and transparency in procurement and contract management 
in the road sector; and 
 
33. 
Sub-component 2 (d): Preparing follow-on operations, including the preparation of 
related feasibility studies, Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIAs), and concept 
designs for potential expressways and high capacity highways.  
 
34. 
Component 3: Road Safety and Institutional Development Support to the Transport 
Sector - (US$12 million), including: 
 
35. 
Sub-component 3 (a): Supporting the implementation of the Road Safety - “the Safe 
System” approach - through: (i) strengthening the capacity of the Recipient’s relevant Road 
Safety Agency, including conducting Road Safety assessment on selected heavily trafficked 
trunk roads to improve Road Safety aspects of the road infrastructure and ensuring compliance 
with vehicle safety requirements; and (ii) piloting enhanced enforcement of road safety 
requirements and post impact care focusing on selected accident prone corridors; and 
 
36. 
Sub-component 3 (b): Strengthening the policy-making, planning and monitoring 
functions of MOT.  
 
 
9
B. 
Project Financing 
37. 
The lending instrument for the project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF).  The 
project cost for the Batu (Zeway) – Arsi Negele road is estimated at US$370 million to be fully 
financed by an International Development Association (IDA) Credit, from the IDA 17 national 
allocation on standard country terms.   
 
38. 
For the construction of the entire Modjo-Hawassa highway and associated activities, 
AfDB and Korea EXIM Bank have together committed US$226 million. The contribution from 
China EXIM Bank will be confirmed following the completion of procurement. GoE will also 
contribute US$180 million for the three sections as counterpart funding. The total cost of the 
construction of the Modjo-Hawassa highway is estimated at about US$1 billion, including 
contingencies and taxes. 
 
Table 1: Project Cost and Financing (US$ million) 
 
Project Components 
Project cost 
IDA Financing 
% Financing 
1. Construction of high capacity 
highway 
 
2. Institutional development and 
regulatory framework 
 
3. Road Safety, and institutional 
development support to the transport 
sector 
 
Total Costs 
340.00 
 
18.00 
 
 
 
12.00 
 
340.00 
 
18.00 
 
 
 
12.00 
100 
 
100 
 
 
 
100 
Total Project Costs 
Front-End Fees 
Total Financing Required
370.00 
0.00 
370.00 
370.00 
0.00 
370.00 
100 
0 
100 
 
C. 
Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
39. 
In reviewing projects implemented under the RSDP, including the newly inaugurated 
expressway, a number of lessons can be learned: 
 
(a) 
The planning and development of expressways is currently done in a piecemeal 
way. A preliminary master plan for expressway development prepared by ERA requires 
enhancement, using traffic modeling, to prioritize the proposed expressway projects. 
There are no overall tolling strategies and mechanisms for attracting the private sector to 
participate in the development, operation and maintenance of expressways and high 
capacity highways are not in place. The project will include the preparation of a 
comprehensive integrated strategic master plan for expressway development and support 
the preparation of legal and regulatory framework to address issues related to tolling, 
outsourcing expressway operational activities and, should the government’s initial 
interest develop further, the preparation of Public Private Partnerships (PPP);   
 
 
10
(b) 
ERA has had insufficient access to worldwide best practice to plan, design and 
implement expressway projects. The full benefits of ITS, improved efficiency of traffic 
movement, toll collection and reduced road accidents, have not been realized. The 
management of the expressway has fallen under a newly established enterprise (ETRE) 
that has a tendency to operate and maintain expressways through direct labor.  Cognizant 
of these constraints, the project has encapsulated adequate technical assistance (TA) to 
improve the planning, design, implementation and operation of the expressway network, 
with provision for installing basic ITS on the expressway network;  
 
(c) 
Increasing traffic levels, the mixture of motorized traffic with pedestrians and 
animals, expanding settlements and commercial activity along trunk roads, combine to 
create an environment on the main road corridors that is increasingly unsafe for the more 
vulnerable road users, causes congestion and is leading to significantly increased journey 
times. The decision to introduce segregated dual carriageway highways along a new 
alignment is appropriate on the grounds of safety and efficient transport.  The project 
includes a standalone Road Safety component to introduce “The Safe System” along the 
expressways and critical accident-prone corridors; 
 
(d) 
Many road construction projects experience delays and cost overruns due to poor 
design work and contract administration by consultants, and delayed mobilization by 
contractors. These issues are to be addressed through the adoption of a Design and Build 
contract format, which is being used successfully by ERA; and  
 
(e) 
Safeguard issues on Design and Build contracts were commonly addressed with 
framework documents. Cognizant of the sizable impact of the construction of a 
greenfield2 road and the environmental sensitivity of the project corridor, an 
environmentally suitable alignment has been developed and a detailed site specific 
safeguards instruments have been prepared.

A. 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
40. 
ERA will be responsible for the implementation of the highway construction, the 
framework for expressway development and institutional strengthening components, and will 
implement activities on behalf of the newly established Ethiopian Toll Roads Enterprise (ETRE). 
ERA has been implementing a series of Bank financed projects and is familiar with Bank 
fiduciary and safeguards policies. ERA also has working experience with AfDB and China 
EXIM Bank on the financing of road projects and has a good understanding of the loan 
processing and contract administration procedures. 
 
41. 
As the implementing agency, ERA will work to coordinate and ensure compatibility of 
both design and implementation across the four sections of the Modjo-Hawassa highway. ERA 


[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

8. 
 
B. 
Results Monitoring and Evaluation 
44. 
The project has established indicators and baseline data to monitor the outputs and 
outcomes of the proposed project, as presented in the Results Framework, Annex 1. Data will 
also be disaggregated by gender. Performance monitoring and evaluation will be carried out 
annually based on the monitoring indicators established for the sector. Studies will monitor 
governance and transparency in procurement and contract management, as well as monitoring 
the impacts of the project on poverty reduction, shared prosperity and gender. 
 
C. 
Sustainability 
45. 
The main source of financing for road maintenance, the Road Fund, is under-resourced as 
it currently receives about 50 percent of the estimated funds required for the maintenance of the 
road network.  The Government is providing funds to bridge this gap through supplementary 
budget allocations for road agencies to complete maintenance programs and has recently decided 
to add vehicle-licensing fees to the Road Fund income.  The responsibility for the management 
of expressways and high capacity highways is vested in ETRE; it collects tolls, operates and 
maintains the newly inaugurated Addis-Adama expressway and will assume responsibility for 
management of the Modjo-Hawassa Highway.

A. 
Overall Risk Rating and Explanation of Key Risks 
46. 
As multiple donors will finance separate sections of the road, and this is a new greenfield 
development along associated sections, which potentially have adverse environmental and social 
impacts, the risk at preparation and implementation is considered to be substantial.  
 
47. 
Environment and Social:  This is a greenfield development project that will take farmlands 
and some scattered rural houses.  The new highway passes close to lakes, parks and a marshy 
area which are environmentally sensitive. The number of people to be affected by the associated 
projects is high, and resettlement and livelihood restoration issues require attention; joint 
supervision may be required. ERA has prepared robust safeguards instruments for the entire road 
from Modjo to Hawassa and will carry out the mitigation measures consistently, by 
mainstreaming them in the Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) to be 
 
12
implemented through the works contracts.  
 
48. 
Capacity constraints: The capacity of Ethiopian Roads Authority (ERA) to deliver 
projects within budget, time and quality is limited.  There are challenges related to: (a) enforcing 
safety and environmental standards on construction sites; (b) limited experience in using design 
and build contracts for expressways, quality assurance for tender documents and delays in tender 
processing; (c) limited experience in maintaining and managing expressways; and (d) slow 
follow-up on entity audit recommendations. To address the capacity constraints adequate 
technical assistance has been provided under this and ongoing transport projects. 
 
49. 
Partners and stakeholders’ relations:  Multiple donors (four donors) provide financing to 
the Modjo-Hawassa highway development and there may be lack of coordination among 
development partners during project design and implementation. Service providers in smaller 
towns along the existing road would consider they will lose business. The highway will restrict 
movement of crossing traffic and animals. ERA has prepared a Framework for Project 
Implementation Coordination (FPIC) outlining the arrangements for joint monitoring of 
compatibility of the engineering standard of the works and consistent implementation of the 
safeguard instruments. The major towns have access to the highway and the smaller towns will 
continue to be interconnected to the major towns and onward to the highway by the existing road 
and new link roads.