[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 42828 chars (38.9% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Regional Context 
1. 
Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) has experienced remarkable economic growth, and boosts 
in productivity in the last decade. Its annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth has 
accelerated from an average of two percent in the 1990s to five percent in 2014. The low-income 
economies in SSA grew on average at 7.4 percent.  The share of the population living below 
poverty (US$1.90 per day) in the region declined from 57 percent in 1990 to 43 percent in 2012.1 
The African middle class has tripled in size over the past 14 years, and the expansion is 
continuing.2 Overall, this growth has been driven largely by a relatively sound fiscal policy, an 
improved business environment, domestic production and consumption power, and increased trade 
and investment in specific sectors such as agriculture, extractives, construction, services, 
information and communication technology (ICT), and tourism.  
 
2. 
As part of SSA, the Eastern and Southern African (ESA) countries have enjoyed 
similar development. Despite having some differences in economic structures, there continues to 
be a heavy reliance on agriculture and extractives in majority of the countries. Some East African 
countries such as Rwanda and Tanzania were outliers in the ESA region and had annual GDP 
growth rates of around seven percent in 2014.3 Growth in oil, gas, mining and agriculture together 
account for 60 percent of the overall economic growth. The potential for growth in these sectors 
has attracted a significant amount of foreign investment, with foreign investment in East Africa 
alone having grown by 11 percent to US$6.8 billion in 2014.4 These investments are mainly 
targeted toward fast expanding sectors such as oil and gas in Tanzania and textiles in Ethiopia. To 
expand, transform, and sustain their economies into the next level of development, the ESA 
countries have to rely more on higher level skills and knowledge, with a focus on science and 
technology (S&T).  
 
3. 
To sustain such growth and transform the economy to be globally competitive, ESA 
requires higher order skills in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). 
However, the required human capital, especially at the higher level, is insufficient across the ESA 
countries. Gaps are most acute in the following areas:  
 
(a) Post-graduate training in S&T. The region does not produce sufficient number of 
skilled graduates required for expanding and diversifying its economy. While higher 
education enrollment has increased rapidly over the years, the region still lags far 
behind other regions (figure 1), especially in generating graduates in S&T, health, and 
other related disciplines. In Rwanda and Tanzania, for example, the percentage of 
enrollment in the arts and social sciences (60 percent and 45 percent respectively) was 
substantially higher than that of science and engineering (20 percent and nine percent 
respectively). In Mozambique, only eight percent of enrollment and four percent of 
                                                 
1 
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2015/10/16/africa-gains-in-health-education-but-numbers-of-
poor-grow. 
2 York, Geoffrey. 2014. “Africa’s middle-class boom is real.” The Globe and Mail, August 19, 2014.  
3 International Monetary Fund. 2015. Regional Economic Outlook: Sub-Saharan Africa Navigating Headwinds. 
Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.  
4 United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. 2015. World Investment Report.  
 
2 
 
graduates were in engineering and technology compared to 44 percent of enrollment 
and 47 percent of graduates in social sciences, law, and business.  
 
Figure 1: Higher Education Enrollment, by Region and Year5  
 
Source: World Bank and Elsevier (2015) 
 
(b) Quality, relevance, and accountability. Firm surveys across ESA reveal that firms face 
difficulties in filling technical and managerial positions, while at the same time, many 
university graduates are not able to find jobs. This is not simply due to the inadequate 
number of graduates, but also due to the low quality and relevance of their education 
and training. Despite the increase in enrollment, faculty qualification has not improved 
much. Very few faculty members have Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) degrees. It is 
estimated that only about 100 PhDs are produced by higher education institutions 
across 31 countries in SSA in science, technology and engineering.6 Institutions often 
do not have the resources to attract top quality faculty, nor are they able to provide 
faculty support with research facilities. There is little accountability demanded of 
higher education institutions, leading to inadequate quality of education across the 
region. In addition, curriculum inputs from, and training engagements for students in 
the private sector are minimal, resulting in a mismatch between the graduates and labor 
market requirements, especially in S&T.  
 
                                                 
5 LYA – latest year available 
6 World Bank, 2014. Applying Science, Engineering and Technology for African Competitiveness and Development. 
Draft Paper. Washington, DC: World Bank.  
 
3 
 
(c) Research outputs and researchers. SSA contributes less than two percent of the global 
research output and just 0.1 percent of patents.7 From 2005-12, Ethiopia acquired only 
one patent and Kenya acquired 29. The region also produces the lowest number of 
scientific researchers in the world. For example, Rwanda, Malawi, Uganda and Zambia 
produce only 54, 123, 83 and 49 researchers per million inhabitants respectively (figure 
2). In comparison, Malaysia and Thailand produce 1,780 and 546 researchers per 
million inhabitants.8  
 
Figure 2: Researchers in ESA per million inhabitants (headcount) 
 
Source: United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). Science Report: Towards 2030 
(2015) 
 
4. 
These deficiencies are particularly severe in the following regional priority areas.   
(a) Industry. In general, ESA countries are experiencing low and declining levels of 
enrollment in areas associated with the growing industrial sectors which require skills 
in STEM. This is despite the vast demand for graduates in emerging sectors with high 
growth potential such as oil and gas, energy, extractives, and railways industries across 
ESA.  The region faces a shortage of skilled professionals with specialized knowledge who 
can innovate and boost productivity in these areas, such as engineers (civil, petroleum, and 
mechanical), geoscientists, and mechanical technicians. Graduates in the fields of 
engineering, manufacturing and construction are only 11.2 percent of the total graduates in 
Rwanda, 6.4 percent in Uganda, 3.82 percent in Mozambique, 17.45 percent in Kenya and 
4.88 percent in Ethiopia respectively.9  
 
(b) Agriculture. Low levels of agricultural productivity, which has exacerbated food 
insecurity and slowed poverty reduction, is partly driven by skill constraints and the 
slow adoption of technology. Primarily this low productivity is because of factors such as 
frequent droughts, rampant diseases (crop and livestock), unimproved crop varieties, lack 
                                                 
7 World Bank and Elsevier. 2015. A Decade of Development in Sub-Saharan African Science, Technology, 
Engineering and Mathematics Research. Washington, DC: Elsevier.   
8 UNESCO. 2015. UNESCO Science Report, 2015. Paris, France: UNESCO.  
9 UIS (UNESCO Institute of Statistics), 2012. Accessed at: http://data.uis.unesco.org/Index.aspx?queryid=163. 
49
54
64
69
83
87
123
200
318
0
100
200
300
400
ZM (08)
RW (09)
MZ (10)
TZ (10)
UG (10)
ET (13)
MW (10)
ZM (12)
KE (10)
 
4 
 
of access to quality seeds/fertilizers, and poor management of water resources. However 
to address these challenges, Africa needs trained personnel such as agribusiness 
specialists/managers, crop scientists, plant breeders, veterinarians, agronomists, water and 
irrigation engineers, and food preservation and processing specialists to drive innovative 
research and teaching for agricultural advancement, improved nutrition, and agricultural 
sustainability.  Africa has moved from being a food exporter in the 1970s to a food importer 
whose share of agricultural exports has fallen from eight percent to two percent; Thailand’s 
share of agricultural exports as a share of world exports is now greater than SSA’s share 
(figure 3, left). Even though the value of the food market in Africa is predicted to rise 
threefold in the coming decades, the region will be unable to meet this demand due to low 
productivity, inadequate capacity, and slow adoption of technology. For example, maize 
yields in SSA is the lowest in the world (figure 3, right).  
 
Figure 3: Decline in Agricultural Production in SSA 
 
 
Source: The Economist accessed at http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21665005-small-
farmers-africa-need-produce-more-happily-easier-it 
(c) Health. Low life expectancy in ESA (60 and 59 years for Eastern and Southern Africa 
respectively; much lower than the global average of 71)10 is traced to a myriad of local 
health challenges. Infectious diseases account for 40-50 percent of illness in the region; 
these include malaria and tuberculosis, diseases that have been eliminated elsewhere. 
Infectious diseases are also a major constraint to both the export of African livestock and 
the spread of diseases from animals to humans. One reason the region has inadequate 
capacity for management of epidemics is a lack of qualified personnel. For example, 
enrollment in medical and health sciences is only six percent in Ethiopia, four percent each 
in Mozambique, Tanzania and Zambia, and seven percent in Rwanda, all of which are 
significantly lower than comparable countries in other regions. Resources in traditional 
medicine and knowledge are not fully explored and utilized in drug development and there 
are concerns that the drugs and vaccines that western pharmaceutical industries produce 
are tailored more towards western diseases and less targeted to the needs of ESA.  
 
                                                 
10 http://www.statistica.com/statistics/274511/life-expectancy-in-africa/; 
http://apps.who.int/gho/data/view.main.690?lang=en. 
 
5 
 
(d) Education. The quality of tertiary education is impeded by poor learning outcomes in 
primary and secondary education, particularly in mathematics and science. Poor 
education quality, especially at the primary and secondary levels, is a significant obstacle 
to higher education access and outcomes. Poor teaching competencies, particularly, in 
mathematics and science are a barrier to the production of high-quality graduates and 
faculty in the field. This is despite the fact that there are currently 150 million primary 
school students and 52 million secondary education students in SSA. There is an 
inadequate capacity in producing innovative and effective teachers, school leaders, and 
administrators, with an added challenge of outdated teaching methodology and curricula. 
 
(e) Applied Statistics. The absence of reliable and accurate data, data management 
systems, and skilled statisticians is a serious constraint to policymaking, adequate 
analysis of development challenges, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of 
interventions. In SSA countries, across various sectors, there is a severe shortage of highly 
trained statisticians and of good quality data. This makes it difficult to provide analyses, 
plan and monitor interventions, inform fact-based policy, and track progress. It may not be 
recognized directly, but inadequate capacity of research and training within higher 
education is an important contributor to the constraints in this area.  
 
5. 
A regional approach to higher education in Africa offers the best way to build and 
sustain excellence in higher education in African economies to develop the human resources 
required for the severe development challenges mentioned above. A regional approach would 
offer the following benefits:  
 
(a) Economies of Scale. Few, if any countries in ESA, have the persistent means to fund 
internationally competitive centers of excellence in the broad range of areas required for 
their economies. Regional specialization and coordination of investments is the only way 
that ESA countries can financially and academically develop quality provision of higher 
education in this broad range. Without coordinated investments, the region risks investing 
scarce resources within the same areas, competing for the same faculty and producing 
similar knowledge, and more importantly, leaving the region with a number of gaps in 
skills, knowledge, and technology. A regional specialization of higher education would: (i) 
concentrate the limited available top-level faculty into a critical mass that can attain 
academic excellence; (ii) establish and sustain the necessary number of centers of 
excellence to support the region’s demand for specialized human capital and knowledge at 
lower unit costs; and (iii) generate increased knowledge and flow of students across 
borders. 
(b) Public Goods. Knowledge and research/innovation outputs generated by institutions in 
ESA countries are a regional public good. Therefore, the knowledge and innovation 
generated through applied research in this endeavor will be available/applicable to the 
consumption of the entire region. The inability to appropriate all the benefits from an 
investment in research and human capital development in its production results is due to 
under-investment.  There are also a number of positive externalities from research and 
innovation which exacerbates this problem. For example, the benefit of having a quantum 
amount of skilled workers, not available before, allows for new types of research and 
innovation, and economic production (including possibly greater entrepreneurship). There 
 
6 
 
are also knowledge spillovers which allow newly trained workers to share new knowledge 
with other less skilled workers, resulting in enhanced productivity (i.e. within firms and in 
universities). 
 
6. 
A regional approach would work best in focusing on the few dynamic institutions with 
pockets of quality faculty that have already been responding innovatively by offering quality, 
fee-based, courses to students in Eastern and Southern Africa.  Success factors for regional 
collaboration in higher education are: (a) collaboration through specialization; (b) political 
emphasis on common standards in benchmarking; and (c) willingness to promote mobility of 
students and faculty. Institutions and centers within universities across ESA already specialize in 
offering high level training in STEM, agriculture, health and S&T innovation (including education 
and applied statistics). Supporting these institutions will allow them to improve and boost the 
quality of education in the region within their fields through partnerships, and allow them to 
compete with institutions in high-income countries for African students capable of paying for 
quality education. 
 
7. 
There is a growing and keen understanding in ESA of the common development 
challenges that the region faces, and a regional response in addressing the skills and capacity 
constraints in S&T is desirable through a shared regional framework and collaboration. 
There is also recognition of the impact such a focus will have in addressing some of the more 
intractable challenges facing the region, including issues of poverty and inequity.    
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
8. 
The higher education system in ESA has experienced expansion in the past decade 
with regard to enrollment and institutions. Despite the impressive growth in enrollments and 
institutions, the current sector is not sufficiently oriented towards the development needs of the 
region. It is largely input-driven and historically funded with inadequate attention to performance 
and results. It now faces numerous challenges that need to be addressed. These challenges are 
discussed below.  
 
9. 
The higher education sector in ESA faces severe constraints with regard to producing 
a critical mass of graduates, including female graduates, to meet regional development needs. 
Despite recent rapid expansion in higher education enrollment in the region, gross enrollment rates 
in ESA countries are still low (one percent in Malawi and six to eight percent in Ethiopia, 
Mozambique, and Rwanda).11 Female enrollment rates (as a percent of total enrollment) are even 
lower with rates of less than one percent in Malawi and four percent in Ethiopia.12 Overall, the 
ESA region produces low numbers of graduates in science, health, agriculture and engineering 
with less than 30 percent of graduates majoring in these fields, with female rates being even lower. 
This scenario is in marked contrast with emerging markets such as Vietnam, mid-income countries 
such as Malaysia, or advanced economies such as South Korea. Further, graduation rates of 
graduate students is also low, just ten percent for PhD students in S&T fields. The low number of 
higher education graduates could potentially influence the overall teaching quality—teaching force 
availability and capacity—within these disciplines at lower levels of education.  
                                                 
11 UIS. 2014 – Ethiopia and Mozambique; 2013 – Rwanda; and 2011 – Malawi. 
12 UIS. 2014 – Ethiopia and 2011 – Malawi.  
 
7 
 
10. 
Though some efforts have been made by regional institutions in crafting policies for 
establishing quality assurance systems across the region, most of these policies are not 
implemented. Individual countries have initiated efforts in improving the quality of their higher 
education institutions under the pressure of system expansion. An example is the mandatory 
external quality assurance for all programs and institutions in Kenya. However, due to low capacity 
and investment, sound quality assurance mechanisms are either inadequate or non-existent. 
Institutions are struggling to provide quality education to students in the face of crumbling 
infrastructure and facilities, outdated curriculum and teaching methods, and insufficient research 
faculty. Particularly in S&T, the curriculum needs to be updated to ensure that graduates are 
abreast of the latest knowledge. Finally, universities need to overhaul the STEM pedagogy, 
particularly with regard to increasing the academic use of technology to deliver quality programs.  
 
11. 
Higher education quality is undermined by the slow pace of faculty capacity 
development and qualifications. Many universities in ESA do not have sufficient number of 
qualified faculty, which in turn prevents them from providing relevant higher education training 
and research mentoring. Entrenched policies, institutional structures, and academic traditions have 
placed obstacles on female representation in teaching, research and administration. They are also 
constrained by the small number of PhDs produced each year who are candidates for faculty 
recruitment or to lead research hubs or centers. For example, in Kenya, 290 doctorates graduated 
in 2013, while tertiary enrollment expanded by 80,000. Even assuming full employment of all new 
PhD holders, the ratio of newly qualified faculty to new students was 1:275. To ensure high quality 
in higher education and research, the production of Master’s and PhD’s must be increased. The 
sector also needs to be cognizant of other issues that deter quality faculty recruitment – low 
salaries, lack of research funding and equipment, and limited autonomy. In addition, most African 
countries have experienced adverse effects of “brain drain”; less than 15 percent of staff in 
universities in Ethiopia, Kenya, Mozambique and Rwanda hold PhD degrees.13 Even flagship 
universities, such as Addis Ababa University (AAU) in Ethiopia and the University of Malawi in 
Malawi, employ only about 20-25 percent of staff with PhDs.  
 
12. 
Independent research capacity is extremely low (Figure 4). Most of the research outputs 
in the ESA are produced with international (non-African) collaboration. Only 30 percent of 
publications in Eastern Africa and 20 percent in Southern Africa are the result of national and/or 
regional collaboration. Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda, and Ethiopia were the most productive countries 
in the region when it came to publications and most of the articles were produced with international 
collaborators. For example, more than 95 percent of articles from Rwanda were with international 
collaborators. Though international collaboration is important, it may result in the research agenda 
being driven by the international partner(s) rather than by problems or challenges that are local to 
the region. Regional collaboration on common development problems remains the most efficient 
way of solving the region’s development challenges. Regional collaboration is however impeded 
by low researcher and staff mobility leading to insufficient cross-regional collaboration for 
addressing regional development challenges.14 A large majority of the articles produced in the 
                                                 
13 World Bank, 2014. Applying Science, Engineering and Technology for African Competitiveness and Development. 
Draft Paper. Washington, DC: World Bank.  
14 World Economic Forum. 2015. The Global Competitiveness Report, 2014-15. Geneva: World Economic Forum.   
 
8 
 
region focus on health, with less than 2 percent of scientific publications produced by Ethiopia, 
Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, and Zambia focusing on engineering, energy, and technology.15 
 
Figure 4: Level of Regional and National Collaboration – number of articles with regional 
co-authors (2012) 
 
Source: Scopus (World Bank. 2015. A Decade of Development in Sub-Saharan Africa Science, Technology, 
Engineering and Mathematics Research. Washington, DC: World Bank) 
 
13. 
The limited engagement with the private sector is reflected in the mismatch between 
the labor market needs and competencies of graduates. Despite the fact that enrollment in 
higher education has been on the rise in the region, business surveys continue to highlight that 
firms cannot find sufficiently skilled workers, particularly those with scientific skills. An example 
is the growing, but unfilled employment need in sectors such as extractives and railways. The lack 
of engagement between industry and universities also hampers innovation. As universities have 
limited engagement with industry, industry has little confidence in the capacity of universities to 
generate graduates as problem solvers for 

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

y, limit the ability of each individual country in the region to develop a whole spectrum of 
research and teaching excellence across all science fields. Coordinated investments with country 
specific specializations allows the region to develop a broad based S&T ecosystem, covering all 
critical areas where S&T capacity is needed, without gaps.  A well networked and integrated S&T 
ecosystem can also have economy of scale advantages with declining unit costs for both graduates 
and for innovation. For example knowledge spillovers can develop between faculty and 
researchers across countries if they have the opportunity to collaborate and share ideas within and 
across disciplines with benefits beyond individual centers. Further, as the development challenges 
are common, regional collaboration can bring together the critical mass of capacity and knowledge, 
otherwise partial, to resolve regional problems.  
 
16. 
The regional approach is already effectively being implemented in the first phase of 
the project in West and Central Africa. Phase I was launched in 2013 for West and Central 
Africa as the Western and Central Africa Higher Education Centers of Excellence Project (ACE 
I). The project had an initial investment of US$150 million, selected 19 African Centers of 
Excellence (ACEs) across seven countries – Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Ghana, Nigeria, 
Senegal and Togo – in three priority areas – STEM, Agriculture, and Health. ACE I, which is now 
operational in all the seven countries, also supports an emerging higher education system in 
Gambia. All the ACEs have started enrolling students, publishing research, developing 
partnerships and other activities that can make them become strong regional centers of excellence 
for the region. Redeemer University in Nigeria, which was the first to have tested an Ebola case in 
its lab was one of the selected ACEs under ACE I. Such regional initiatives are expected to set a 
global example for effectively stimulating collaboration, networking, and partnerships to cost-
effectively solve regional development issues. 
 
17. 
Building on the ACE I experience, the Eastern and Southern Africa Higher Education 
Centers of Excellence Project (ACE II) seeks to collectively address a set of key development 
challenges facing ESA through interventions in developing critically-needed science and 
technology capacity by: (a) selecting ACEs, from existing higher education institutions that have 
the capacity in specialized areas and the potential to help address regional priorities, through a 
competitive and transparent process from existing higher education institutions that have capacity 
in specialized areas and potential to help address regional priorities; (b) strengthening these 
specialized ACEs and enabling them to produce excellent training and applied research that meets 
the demand for  highly skilled personnel and knowledge/technology transfer within regional 
priorities; (c) building networks among these ACEs to promote  regional collaboration and foster 
partnerships with other institutions and the industry to produce innovative solutions with real 
impact; and (d) developing a culture of results-orientation and accountability among these ACEs 
through a performance-based financing mechanism, helping to set an example for other higher 
education institutions in the region. 
 
 
10 
 
C. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes 
18. 
The proposed Eastern and Southern Africa Higher Education Centers of Excellence 
Project (ACE II) is fully aligned with (i) the Bank’s twin goals of poverty reduction and 
shared prosperity; and (ii) the Bank’s Africa Strategy: to strengthen competitiveness and 
employment through the production of quality high-skilled human resources in priority 
growth sectors. Through a sector-based approach, ACE II is designed to identify and address 
higher skills and innovation requirements for priority sectors in the region. There is extensive 
global evidence of the importance of higher education in building critical human capital and 
driving research and innovation and growth. Countries in ESA have lagged behind in developing 
the higher education sub-sector, thereby jeopardizing their growth potential. ACE II is meant to 
help address this deficiency through the creation of Centers of Excellence that address critical 
human resource gaps and innovations in priority sectors and will have the potential to become the 
regionally leading scientific and academic institution in its particular field, serving the region 
collectively to tackle the development challenges they all share.  
 
19. 
The project is part of the Bank’s Regional Integration Assistance Strategy (Report 
No. 43022-AFR) which coordinates interventions for regional public goods. The Strategy 
foresees the proposed ACE II operation as having economies of scale in the use of facilities, 
equipment, and staff in specialized fields; to share innovations and good practices in teaching and 
learning; and to enhance cross-border research networks.  
 
20. 
The project will contribute to the Africa Climate Business Plan.17 The plan proposes 
to bolster the region’s capacity to withstand the adverse consequences of climate change through 
the facilitation of investment into interventions that tackle climate change induced issues in the 
region. A number of centers of excellence selected in the project cover elements of climate change 
in line with its consequence for priority areas. Climate change has been included as a regional 
priority area under which ACEs could be financed at a later date depending on the availability of 
funding.  
 
21. 
The project complements other regional initiatives in Africa that focus on developing 
science and technology skills through collaboration and partnerships. These include the Bank-
supported Partnership for Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology (PASET) which seeks 
to build a technical and scientific skilled labor force for priority sectors, from technical/vocational 
to higher education levels as well as research, to support the structural transformation of Africa. 
The proposed ACE II project will collaborate with the benchmarking exercise overseen by PASET 
to seek best practices in science education.  
 
22. 
The project aligns with Country Partnership Frameworks of the participating 
countries in three ways: (i) It strengthens ongoing national operations to promote skills through 
a regional instrument (e.g., Malawi and Mozambique); (ii) It supports priority growth sectors 
through investments in skills and innovation (e.g., Rwanda, Tanzania and Zambia); and (iii) It 
raises youth employability and skills (e.g., Kenya, Mozambique, Tanzania, and Uganda). National 
governments and universities view this project as an opportunity to scale up regional collaboration 
                                                 
17 http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2015/11/24/world-bank-group-unveils-16-billion-africa-climate-
business-plan-to-tackle-urgent-climate-challenges. 
 
11 
 
in higher education; establish high-quality regional programs to train faculty in critical 
development priority areas; develop a new model for industry-academia collaboration; and reach 
a hitherto unachieved level of quality in higher education in the region.  
 
23. 
The ESA countries strongly endorse a regional approach to higher education. There 
has been a strong interest in establishing regional centers of excellence. By pooling projects’ 
regional resources, these countries aim to improve the quality of training and research in higher 
education, and reduce the skill gaps in critical areas. The project is also in sync with development 
strategies of other regional bodies such as the African Union Comprehensive African Agriculture 
Development Project, Science, Technology, and Innovation Strategy for Africa, and regional 
integration initiatives under the East African Community (EAC) and the Southern Africa 
Development Community (SADC). While the interest of governments in the region for the ACE 
approach is strong, the demand from ESA universities and other scientific institutions in the region 
(who in several cases are fairly autonomous from their governments) is equally pronounced. Ten 
countries originally expressed interest in the project. Out of the ten countries, eight are 
participating in ACE II as ACE hosting countries – Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, 
Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia – have emphasized the alignment of the project with their 
national development priorities as well. Both Burundi and Zimbabwe initially expressed interest 
in their participation in ACE II.  Burundi was unable to participate in the Call for Proposals due to 
the unrest in the country at that time.  Though it does not host any ACEs, as an International 
Development Association (IDA) eligible country, Burundi is eligible to access services offered by 
the ACEs in other countries and regional capacity-building activities under the project.  Zimbabwe 
is not an IDA eligible country and its participation is subject to whether it can finance its ACEs 
and other capacity building activities.  It participated in the Call for Proposals and has one proposal 
selected by the Regional Steering Committee (RSC) based on the technical merit through the 
independent evaluation process, although funding for it is yet to be secured.  In the meantime, 
Zimbabwe can participate in ACE capacity-building activities through self-financing.

A. Project Development Objective (PDO)18 
To strengthen selected Eastern and Southern African higher education institutions to deliver 
quality post-graduate education and build collaborative research capacity in the regional 
priority areas. 
 
Project Beneficiaries 
 
24. 
The project beneficiaries are: 
(a) Students in participating universities and their partner institutions across Eastern and 
Southern Africa will benefit from high quality education and training in regional 
priority areas; 
                                                 
18 The PDO will be slightly adjusted for its use in customized legal documents for each of the participating countries, 
i.e., “The objective of the Project is to support the Recipient to strengthen selected Eastern and Southern African 
Higher Education Institutions in the Recipient’s territory to deliver quality post-graduate education and build 
collaborative research capacity in the regional priority areas.” 
 
12 
 
(b) Employers in targeted sectors/industries will have greater access to high quality/skilled 
personnel, results of applied research, and scientific knowledge for productivity 
improvement; as well as  knowledge partners (including companies, governmental or 
non-governmental organizations) will use research produced by the ACEs; 
(c) Communities in which the ACEs reside will benefit from improved educational and 
research outreach of the ACEs, particularly primary and secondary schools and 
students;  
(d) Faculty and staff in the ACEs will benefit from improved teaching and research 
conditions and professional development opportunities;  
(e) Regional institutions such as EAC and SADC will benefit from improved capacity of 
the ACEs;  
(f) Faculty and students in STEM and other priority-sector disciplinary areas will benefit 
from exchange visits, collaborative teaching and research, and other knowledge-
sharing activities across the ACEs organized by the ACE II Regional Facilitation 
Unit19; and   
(g) ACE hosting universities will benefit from the strengthened capacity of their ACEs, 
and quality improvement measures including benchmarking with other institutions 
initiated under the project.  
PDO Level Results Indicators 
 
25. 
The following indicators will be used to measure progress towards achieving the above 
PDO:  
 
(a) Regional students20 enrolled by the ACEs in  Master’s and PhD programs (number); 
(b) Students (both national and regional) enrolled by the ACEs in Master’s and PhD 
programs (number); 
(c) Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs) on partnerships for collaboration in applied 
research and training entered into by the ACEs (number); and 
(d) Accredited education programs offered by the ACEs (number).  
(e) Direct Project Beneficiaries (number), of which female (%)

26. 
The proposed ACE II project will support the governments of eight participating countries 
– Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia in 
strengthening the selected ACEs to deliver quality post-graduate education and build collaborative 
research capacity in the regional priority areas. With the view of achieving the above described 
vision and objective, the proposed ACE II operation will implement three sets of activities: (i) 
strengthening 24 selected ACEs for ESA in a set of defined regional priority areas21 (US$140 
                                                 
19 In the customized legal agreements, the “Regional Facilitation Unit” is referred to as the “Regional Facilitation 
Entity.” 
20 “Regional students” excludes students from each ACE’s own ACE hosting country.  
21 These priority areas have been defined by the project’s Regional Steering Committee (RSC) after broad 
consultations in the region. Climate change was added as a priority area for future call for proposals if financing 
becomes available.  
 
13 
 
million); (ii) providing capacity building support to these ACEs through regional activities (US$3 
million); and (iii) supporting coordination and management of the implementation of Components 
1 and 2 (US$5 million).  Outlined below are the proposed activities to be financed under ACE II, 
including the key features of design and implementation.  Their details can be found in Annex 2.           
 
A. Project Components 
Component 1: Strengthening Africa Centers of Excellence (ACEs) in Regional Priority 
Areas (US$140 million) 
27. 
Under this component, the IDA Credit will finance the strengthening of 24 ACEs in 
five clusters of regional priorities – Industry, Agriculture, Health, Education and Applied 
Statistics.  Each of these 24 specialized regional centers will receive a grant of up to US$6 
million22 for implementing its proposal in a specific regional priority area.  All these ACEs  are 
expected to perform the following tasks: 
 
(a) 
Build institutional capacity to provide quality post-graduate education with 
relevance to the labor market; 
(b) 
Build institutional capacity to conduct high quality applied research, relevant to 
addressing a key development challenge/priority; 
(c) 
Develop and enhance partnerships with other academic institutions (national, 
regional and international) to pursue academic excellence; 
(d) 
Develop and enhance partnerships with industry and the private sector to generate 
greater impact;  
(e) 
Improve governance and management of the institution and set up a role model for 
other higher education institutions; and  
(f) 
Deliver outreach, and create an impact, to society by delivering excellent teaching 
and producing high quality applied research.  
 
28. 
The ACEs financed under the ACE II project were selected through an open, 
objective, transparent, and merit-based competitive process. The Call for Proposals was 
followed by a two-step evaluation process conducted by the Independent Evaluation Committee 
(IEC)23: a technical evaluation, as well as an onsite and leadership evaluation. Out of the 92 eligible 
proposals submitted, RSC conditionally selected 25 proposals to be ACEs, out of which only 24 
will be financed under the project based on the following criteria24: (a) address a specific challenge 
in one of the five priority areas in the region – industry, agriculture, health, education and applied 
statistics; (b) be of the highest quality; (c) have institutional capacity; (d) provide geographical 
balance; and (e) have IDA funding eligibility and availability. These selected ACEs underwent 
financial management (FM), procurement and safeguards assessments. Table 1 provides a 
glance at the distribution of these ACEs by cluster and country. 
                                                 
22 This amount is the capped disbursement amount per ACE for the project period of five years. Each ACE, with the 
exception of ACEs in Rwanda, can receive a maximum of up to US$6 million over the project duration of five years. 
Of the four ACEs in Rwanda, as agreed with the Government of Rwanda, two (Education and Statistics) can receive 
a maximum of US$4.5 million and the remaining two (ICT and Energy) can receive a maximum of US$5.5 million 
over the project duration.  
23 The IEC is comprised of over 60 African and international experts with specialties in the proposal subject areas.  
24 The ACE from Zimbabwe, although conditionally selected, could not be included in the project as Zimbabwe is not 
eligible for IDA financing and has not been able to raise the needed funds so far.  
 
14 
 
Table 1: Distribution of Selected ACEs by Country and Cluster 
 
Country/ 
Cluster 
 
Industry 
Agriculture 
Health 
Education 
Statistics 
TOTAL 
Ethiopia 
2 (Railways, Water 
Management.) 
1 (Climate Smart) 
1 (Drug 
Development) 
 
 
4 
Kenya 
 
 
1 (Manufacturing) 
2 (Agribusiness, Food) 
 
 
 
3 
Malawi 
 
1 (Fisheries) 
1 (Public Health & 
Herbal Medicine) 
 
 
2 
Mozambique 
1 (Oil & Gas) 
 
 
 
 
1 
Rwanda 
2 (ICT, Energy) 
 
 
1 (STEM 
teaching) 
1 (Applied 
Statistics) 
4 
Tanzania 
 
1 (Water 
Infrastructure) 
2 (Unspecified – 
Rodents. Agricultural 
Education) 
1 (Infectious 
Diseases) 
 
 
4 
Uganda 
 
1 (Product Design 
& Manufacturing) 
2 (Crop Improvement, 
Agro-ecology) 
1 (Pharma-Bio & 
Traditional 
Medicine) 
 
 
4 
Zambia 
 
 
1 (Mining) 
 
1 (Infectious 
Diseases) 
 
 
2 
TOTAL 
 
9 
8 
5 
1 
1 
24 
 
29. 
The proposed ACEs are expected to address specific development challenges facing 
the region through graduate training (Master’s, PhD, and short-term courses) and applied 
research in the form of partnerships and collaborations with other institutions and the 
private sector. These are highlighted below for a quick illustration of their potential impact.  
 
(a) Industry. There are nine selected ACEs in the areas of energy, extractives, ICT, 
manufacturing, railways, and water, based in Ethiopia, Kenya, Mozambique, Rwanda, 
Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia.  The center in energy will try to alleviate constraints which 
have resulted from low energy access and adoption of technologies in rural areas and poor 
inter-state energy trading in ESA. The centers in mining and oil and gas will take the lead on 
sustainable development of the extractive industry through the provision of education, training 
programs and research solutions in the field. The center in ICT will educate Africans who will 
develop and deploy innovative ICT services. The two centers in the water sector will address 
water and sanitation challenges in the region to ensure safe water and sanitation requirements 
for water provision; apply technology to use ground water for agricultural applications; and 
improve municipal and industrial water management. The center in railways will produce 
trained graduates who can fill the manpower needs of the burgeoning railway sector. The 
centers in manufacturing will utilize nanotechnology to fill the gap in promoting value addition 
of primary produce.  
 
(b) Agriculture. There are eight selected ACEs in the agriculture area, based in Ethiopia, 
Kenya, Malawi, Tanzania, and Uganda. They will address development challenges of food 
insecurity and rural poverty by focusing on sustainable agriculture and agribusiness 
development and management, e.g., developing value chain capacity in the use of 
biotechnology and climate smart agriculture to increase crop and livestock productivity and