[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 52375 chars (25.2% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
1. 
Ethiopia is a large and geographically diverse country, with a representation of 98 
nationalities who speak 93 languages, a total population of about 90 million, and a 
population growth rate of 2.6 percent (2013). At that rate, the United Nations estimates that 
the population will reach 130 million by 2025. Ethiopia is projected to be among the world’s 10 
largest countries by population in 2050. IDA commitments to Ethiopia in recent years have been 
over US$1 billion per year. Making progress in Ethiopia on the two goals of the World Bank 
Group is therefore important both for global progress and for the country itself. 
2. 
Ethiopia remains one of the world’s poorest countries but has achieved high levels 
of economic growth and made substantial progress on social and human development over 
the past decade. The country’s per capita income of US$550 (Atlas gross national income, 
2014) is substantially lower than the regional average of US$1,257 and the eleventh lowest 
worldwide. Ethiopia is ranked 173 out of 187 countries on the Human Development Index 
(2014) of the United Nations Development Programme. However, economic growth has helped 
reduce poverty in both urban and rural areas. Since 2005, 2.5 million people have been lifted out 
of poverty and the share of population below the poverty line has fallen from 38.7 percent in 
2004/05 to 29.6 percent in 2010/11 (using a poverty line close to US$1.25/day). Ethiopia is 
among the countries that have made the fastest progress on the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs) and Human Development Index ranking over the past decade. In particular Ethiopia has 
made substantive gains in the areas of universal primary education, gender parity in education, 
child mortality, maternal mortality, HIV/AIDS, and malaria.  
3. 
Ethiopia’s constitution ensures a federal, democratic system. Ethiopia’s current 
government system was established in the early 1990s by the Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary 
Democratic Front, which took over the country in 1991 after militarily defeating the previous 
regime. Since 2003, the country has actively pursued decentralization of governance to the 
regional and woreda levels—a woreda is a district with an average population of 100,000. 
Ethiopia marked an important milestone in August 2012 with the first peaceful and constitutional 
transition of power in the country’s modern history and the appointment of Hailemariam 
Desalegn as prime minister, following the death of Meles Zenawi, who had led Ethiopia since 
the Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Democratic Front took over. 
4. 
The Government of Ethiopia (GoE) has completed its Growth and Transformation 
Plan (GTP) (2010/11–2014/15), which set a long-term goal for Ethiopia to become a middle-
income country by 2025, with a growth rate of at least 11.2 percent per year during the 
plan period. A second phase of the GTP is currently being finalized. To achieve the GTP goals 
and objectives, the GoE has followed a ‘developmental state’ model, with a strong role for the 
government in certain aspects of the economy. It has prioritized key sectors such as industry and 
agriculture as drivers of sustained economic growth and job creation. The GTP also reaffirms the 
GoE’s commitment to human development. The programs of development partners (DPs) are 
broadly aligned with the GTP priorities.  
2 
 
5. 
The Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY13–FY16 sets out the 
principles for engagement within this framework, as recently reviewed in the 2014 CPS 
Progress Report. The CPS supports the GoE in implementing the GTP. It includes two primary 
pillars and seven strategic objectives. Pillar One (Fostering Competitiveness and Employment) 
aims to support Ethiopia in achieving the following strategic objectives: (a) a stable 
macroeconomic environment; (b) increased competitiveness and productivity (a particular area 
of focus for the IFC); (c) increased and improved delivery of infrastructure; and (d) enhanced 
regional integration. Pillar Two (Enhancing Resilience and Reducing Vulnerabilities) aims to 
support Ethiopia through (e) improved delivery of social services and (f) comprehensive social 
protection (SP) and risk management. The CPS also has a foundation of (g) good governance and 
state building. In line with the GTP, gender and climate change have been included as cross-
cutting issues in the CPS. The CPS Progress Report reconfirmed these strategic objectives while 
noting that the Bank Group will place renewed emphasis on a stable macroeconomic 
environment, increased competitiveness and productivity, regional integration, and the 
urbanization process. 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context  
6. 
Ethiopia has a strong record of reducing extreme poverty in recent years; however, 
the main drivers of this progress have been rural: agricultural growth, provision of basic 
services, and safety nets. The structural transformation that has taken place in value addition (a 
shift from agriculture to services) has contributed very little to poverty reduction.  
7. 
Although Ethiopia remains predominantly rural, urbanization is taking place, and 
as Ethiopia urbanizes, poverty becomes more urban. In 2000, 11 percent of Ethiopia’s poor 
lived in cities, but this rose to 14 percent in 2011. The urban population reached 11.9 million by 
the last census in 2007 and was estimated to reach 16.7 million in 2014, with an average 
population growth rate of 3.8 percent. Urban population growth is expected to increase, with a 
tripling of the urban population expected by 2034 and 30 percent of the population in urban areas 
by 2028 (Ethiopia Urbanization Review, World Bank 2015). As more of the urban poor live in 
large urban centers, expanding development programs to address key challenges to urban 
poverty reduction is imperative. 
8. 
An economically productive urban transformation is necessary for Ethiopia to reach 
middle-income status, end poverty, and improve shared prosperity. Getting urban growth 
correct now is crucial to developing the type of cities that foster inclusive growth in the long run. 
If managed proactively, urban population growth presents an opportunity to shift the structure 
and location of economic activity from rural agriculture to the larger and more diversified urban 
industrial and service sectors. If not managed proactively, rapid urban population growth may 
pose a demographic challenge as cities struggle to provide citizens with jobs, infrastructure and 
services, and housing (Ethiopia Urbanization Review, World Bank 2015).  
Urban Poverty and Labor Markets 
9. 
Urban poverty rates in Ethiopia are quite high, particularly in the large cities. The 
urban-rural poverty rate differential is low in comparison to other countries. The total national 
poverty head count in 2011 was 29.6 percent (30.4 percent in rural Ethiopia and 25.7 percent in 
3 
 
urban areas). Poverty rates in Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa were as high as 28.1 percent and 28.3 
percent, respectively. The poverty gap index is estimated to be 8 percent in rural Ethiopia and 6.9 
percent in urban Ethiopia. 
10. 
In large cities, poverty has been falling, but not as fast as in rural areas and smaller 
urban centers. From 2005 to 2011, consumption growth was negative for the poorest 15 percent 
of the urban population and for the majority of households in Addis Ababa as wages did not 
increase to compensate households for the rising food prices that they faced. One-fifth of 
Ethiopia’s urban population lives in Addis Ababa and reducing poverty rates in this and other 
large urban centers is a key priority toward addressing poverty reduction in Ethiopia. 
11. 
Access to the labor market is a key determinant of poverty in urban areas. The 
poorest are those with inadequate employment or those who cannot engage in labor markets 
because of age, disability, or ill-health. Distinct groups of urban poor can be identified each with 
diverse needs (annex 6).  
12. 
The most visible faces of urban poverty are the destitute. These are the poor that live 
on the street and comprise street children, the homeless, and beggars, who need housing, 
healthcare, counseling, and often reunification with their families, in addition to financial 
support. This group is very poor but also relatively small in number (an estimated 3 percent of 
the poorest 15 percent of urban households).   
13. 
Another clearly identifiable group of the urban poor are the elderly and disabled 
living in households with no working-age members (7 percent of poorest 15 percent). 
Financial and community support is weaker for this group in cities than in rural communities and 
as a result they are both poorer and more vulnerable than the elderly and disabled in rural areas. 
Households with an elderly head are 13 percentage points more likely to be poor in urban areas 
(in rural areas they are no poorer than the average rural household). Households with disabled 
members have poverty rates 19 percentage points above the urban average. This group needs 
long-term financial support in addition to home-based care services.  
14. 
However, the largest groups of urban poor are those with little work or those in low-
quality employment. Unemployment is strongly correlated with poverty. It is not just found 
among a more-educated middle class; households with unemployed or underemployed comprise 
42 percent of the poorest 15 percent.1 Almost half (48 percent) of the poorest 15 percent of urban 
households live in households where, at a given point in time, all adults are working, half in 
marginal self-employment (mostly in services) and half in low-wage employment in services, 
manufacturing, and construction. Very often individuals move in and out of unemployment, self-
employment, and employment over time. 
15. 
High rates of unemployment are present in large cities, reflecting a number of 
imperfections in urban labor markets (Urban Labor Market Study, World Bank 2015). The 
overall unemployment rate in urban areas is 17.1 percent, but this is higher in Addis Ababa (23.6 
percent) and among the youth (27.9 per cent and 18.3 percent for age groups 20–24 years and 
                                                   
1 Underemployment refers to those in work, but that report looking for more hours of work. Almost a third (31 
percent) of those working in Addis Ababa report being underemployed. 
4 
 
25–29 years, respectively).2 A public sector premium in both wages and job satisfaction 
encourages queuing for public sector jobs among those with secondary and graduate education; 
as they queue they enter into temporary unskilled employment opportunities, crowding out 
unskilled workers better suited to permanent employment in these activities. Wages for unskilled 
jobs in Ethiopia are unable to fall any further to clear the market as they currently barely cover 
the cost of basic food and other requirements for workers to be able to engage in a full day of 
work. There is also evidence of high job search costs; with 84 percent in unemployment stating 
that they reduce their search efforts because search is costly (it involves travelling to job bulletin 
boards).  
16. 
Low wages reflect low rates of labor productivity (World Bank Ethiopia Economic 
Update 2015). Increasing the productivity of work through training and perhaps also ancillary 
support to workers, such as transportation assistance, lunches, and support for children or elderly 
dependents, can increase productivity and the value of take-home pay. Lack of access to capital 
is cited as a constraint to entering and expanding self-employment activities. A recent impact 
evaluation suggests that provision of grants and some basic training on business planning can 
have a large impact on self-employment income (Blattman and Dercon 2015).3 Lack of space is a 
particularly binding constraint on self-employment in Addis Ababa as all businesses are required 
to register and have business premises.  
17. 
Women face specific challenges in participating in urban labor markets. Female 
labor force participation rates are 13 percentage points lower than male participation rates and 
the most common reason for not participating is domestic responsibilities (Ethiopia Labor 
Market Study 2015, Franklin 2014). Affordable child-care that makes it possible for women to 
engage in the labor market is often not available. Women are much more likely to be in informal 
employment than men (Ethiopia Urbanization Review 2015) in part reflecting lower educational 
attainment (annex 6). 
18. 
The government is encouraging the creation of new jobs in large cities through 
favorable incentives to foreign direct investment and the development of large industrial 
zones in Addis Ababa and other cities, with some success.4 However, new firms complain 
about the cost of hiring workers given the lack of soft skills and factory work experience among 
new hires and the high rates of turnover. The GoE sees Technical and Vocational Education and 
Training (TVET) as an important means by which to improve worker productivity. However, the 
quality of public TVET is low and firms report not hiring TVET graduates, using other training 
institutes, or conducting in-house training instead (World Bank 2014).  
19. 
The close relationship between employment and poverty in urban areas requires a 
tailored approach. SP for the poorest in urban areas needs to combine income support with 
support to improve employability for those households with working-age adults.  
                                                   
2 2014 Urban Employment and Unemployment Survey. 
3 Blattman, C. and S. Dercon (2015). More sweatshops for Africa? A randomized trial of industrial jobs and self-
employment. Working paper. 
4 In 2015, McKinsey & Company found Ethiopia to be ranked a top sourcing destination by apparel companies, the first 
time ever for an African country. 
5 
 
Characteristics of Social Safety Nets 
20. 
Recently, the GoE has shown a strong commitment to SP to sustain economic 
growth while protecting the social and economic rights of citizens and preventing social 
disintegration and instability that widening inequality may generate. This is reflected in the 
National Social Protection Policy (NSPP) which was approved by the Council of Ministers in 
November 2014. The government has also strongly recognized the importance of SP both in 
GTP I and GTP II. The NSPP has identified social safety nets and livelihood and employment 
generation as important pillars. The Urban Productive Safety Net Project (UPSNP) is fully 
embedded in the NSPP and GTP II. In addition, other important national policies and strategies 
will also guide the design and implementation of UPSNP (see box 1). 
21. 
The GoE has considerable experience in delivering safety net and public works 
(PW) programs. The Productive Safety Net Project (PSNP), supported by the World Bank, has 
been providing transfers to rural beneficiaries since 2005 and in its current phase will reach 10 
million beneficiaries. Transfers are made in return for engagement in PW. The project has 
resulted in considerable experience being built within the GoE on how to target poor 
beneficiaries; deliver timely and predictable transfers; and design and implement PW on a large 
scale. The Urban Local Government Development Program (ULGDP) supported by the Bank 
provides block grants to municipal local governments that are largely used by municipalities for 
developing infrastructure, in part through labor-intensive PW. The ULGDP has been 
successfully implemented for several years in a number of Ethiopian cities and is now into its 
second phase. It has effectively delivered labor-intensive PW programs in urban areas, mainly 
cobblestone projects and brick making. 
Box 1. Policy Framework of the UPSNP 
NSPP: In November 2014, the Ethiopian Council of Ministers approved an NSPP prepared by the Ministry of 
Labor and Social Affairs (MoLSA). The Social Protection Policy has a broad objective of providing an overall SP 
system and creating an enabling environment in which Ethiopian citizens have equitable access to SP services 
that will enhance inclusive growth and development. Overall, the policy commits the government to move 
beyond the partial, and fragmented, provision of SP to establish a comprehensive SP system. The policy puts 
strong emphasis on the need to expand social safety nets and livelihood interventions in rural areas and for 
initiating the same in urban areas in a more effectively targeted and coordinated manner. The policy provides the 
framework for the coordination and provision of SP services in Ethiopia defining the roles and responsibilities of 
the GoE, at federal, regional, and local levels to manage a SP system to fulfil the constitutional rights of citizens.  
Urban Food Security and Job Creation Strategy: Within the framework of the NSPP, the Ministry of Urban 
Development and Housing (MUDHo) has developed an Urban Food Security and Job Creation Strategy, which 
was approved by the government on May 8, 2015. The strategy aims to reduce poverty and vulnerability among 
the urban poor living below the poverty line over a period of 10 years. The proposed Urban Productive Safety 
Project is the first instrument of the government to implement this strategy.    
The UPSNP will also contribute to the implementation of the following government policies and strategies: 
(a) The GTP for 2015/16–2019/20 
(b) Ethiopian Cities Prosperity Initiative: Building Green, Resilient and Well Governed Cities 
(c) The Urban Development Policy (2005) 
(d) The National Policy and Strategy on Disaster Risk Management 
(e) The Climate Resilient Green Economy Strategy 
(f) The National Nutrition Program 
(g) The National Financial Inclusion Strategy currently under preparation  
 
 
6 
 
22. 
The PSNP is exclusively focused on rural areas and urban-focused SP support 
programs are inadequate, less systematic, and fragmented. The GoE has implemented a 
number of poverty-focused measures to tackle the increasing level of vulnerability in urban 
areas. In addition, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) are implementing small programs to 
address the specific needs of vulnerable groups such as people affected by HIV/AIDS, the 
elderly, orphans, street children, and people with disability. Traditional social support 
mechanisms, locally known as Iddirs and Equbs, have also been providing support for the 
poorest communities in specific localities. However, given the high number of poor and 
vulnerable in many urban areas, the coverage of the existing support is very limited and 
insufficient to bring about the required impact at scale. 
23. 
Currently, the GoE’s support to urban households is largely provided in the form of 
subsidies for wheat, energy, and housing.  These programs absorb about 20 percent of SP 
spending, yet the value of these subsidies is much lower than the value of direct transfers made 
in the PSNP and there is also considerable leakage in these programs as they are not targeted to 
the most vulnerable groups (World Bank 2014). The government has adopted several programs 
to improve the quality of affordable urban housing by replacing slums with condominiums. 
However, few poor households have directly benefited from the program. In addition, city 
administrations are improving urban slum areas by building access roads, providing public 
toilets, and improving the public tap water supply. Furthermore, the government has set up 
different youth employment schemes for unemployed youth and has created employment 
opportunities through different programs, including the ULGDP. In most circumstances, youth 
are not hired directly but small groups of youth that have registered as small and micro 
enterprises (SMEs), as a result of a significant government program to promote SMEs, have been 
hired. 
24. 
The MUDHo is leading the design of a systematic productive urban safety net and 
livelihood support intervention which will be implemented through a 10-year program 
framework. The long-term program framework has an objective of reaching 4.7 million poor in 
all urban areas by implementing productive and predictable urban safety nets and complimentary 
livelihood interventions. The first phase supported by the proposed project will run from 2016 to 
2020 and will focus on putting in place basic safety net building blocks, including productive and 
predictable transfers through PW, livelihood interventions, and capacity building, in response to 
the GoE’s request for immediate safety net support for the urban poor.  
25. 
In the long run, the proposed UPSNP and the rural PSNP will allow the GoE to 
gradually operate a safety net at the national level. The UPSNP and the rural PSNP will be 
guided by a common policy framework and will also share a number of operational modalities 
and systems to ensure a coherent national safety net program.  
26. 
The UPSNP is grounded in the unique challenges that shape and perpetuate urban 
poverty. In particular, the approach underpinning the UPSNP recognizes that urban poverty is 
highly complex, is dynamic, and has its own unique features. While ensuring technical and 
operational rigor, the project will put a significant premium on adaptation and learning, including 
establishing flexible arrangements that can be molded based on prevailing circumstances and are 
informed by systematic feedback loops as the program is gradually rolled out. The learning will 
draw from the UPSNP itself, as well as from relevant lessons from the rural PSNP, the Women 
7 
 
Entrepreneurship Development Project (WEDP), and the ULGDP. In addition the program will 
draw on international experience with social safety nets, from among others, in Argentina, El 
Salvador, India, and Pakistan.  
27. 
The rural PSNP is moving from delivery of a safety net service to supporting the 
development of a national system. The design of the urban safety net will make linkages 
with PSNP to benefit from its systems investments. These will include such areas as the 
national unified registry and the management information system (MIS). Efforts will be made to 
establish strong coordination and a resource and knowledge-sharing mechanism between the 
implementers of the two programs. In addition to the lead ministries of the MUDHo and Ministry 
of Agriculture (MoA), the implementers of the proposed UPSNP and the rural PSNP 
respectively, the MoLSA and the Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation (MoFEC) will 
play important roles in this regard. 
C. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes  
28. 
The proposed project will directly contribute to the Bank's goals of ending extreme 
poverty and promoting shared prosperity by providing targeted safety net support and livelihood 
services to the most vulnerable in Ethiopia. 
29. 
The proposed project is expected to contribute to the realization of Ethiopia's GTP I 
and II ensuring that the urban poor and vulnerable receive a predictable safety net and the 
support they require to experience faster income growth. GTP II (under preparation for 2016 
to 2020) is expected to continue the approach of the existing GTP, with an additional emphasis 
on industrialization and urbanization. It is also expected that the SP sector will be one of the 
priority areas of GTP II. As such, an urban safety net project is well placed to support the 
objectives of GTP II. 
30. 
The government’s Social Protection Policy and Strategy and the Urban Safety Net 
Strategy and long-term program framework provide an important foundational 
framework for the project. The project will also coordinate and align with other urban 
development policies, strategies, and programs. 
31. 
The UPSNP is well aligned with the FY13–FY16 CPS for Ethiopia. The CPS 
identifies four strategic pillars which are strongly aligned with the GTP. These include (a) Job 
Creation through Increased Productivity and Competitiveness; (b) Transformation to Modern and 
Productive Agriculture; (c) Strengthened Systems to Better Respond to Shocks and Increase 
Resilience and Developing a Comprehensive Approach to Social Protection and Risk 
Management; and (d) Increasing Government Effectiveness. 
32. 
The UPSNP will support Pillar 1 of the CPS by increasing wage and self-
employment through (a) investing in the skills of beneficiary households through PW and 
training; and (b) helping households secure the financing required to invest in self-employment 
opportunities and job search. 
33. 
The UPSNP will also directly support Pillar 3 of the CPS by increasing the resilience 
of vulnerable urban households through timely and predictable transfers and livelihoods 
interventions. In addition, the system development and capacity building activities will also 
8 
 
contribute to improved social service delivery in urban areas. The capacity building and program 
coordination and management component of the project will promote social accountability (SA) 
and active involvement of urban citizens in the planning, targeting, and implementing of the 
safety net and livelihood interventions thereby contributing to ‘good governance and state 
building’ under Pillar 3 of the CPS. 
34. 
The CPS Progress Report in 2014 called for a renewed emphasis on integrating 
challenges and opportunities from urbanization into World Bank Group programs. The 
ongoing Systematic Country Diagnostic emphasizes the importance of addressing urban poverty 
and improving the productivity of work in urban areas. The UPSNP is directly focused on 
addressing the challenges of urban poverty and supporting poor households to take advantage of 
the economic opportunities that urban development provides. To ensure synergy and 
complementarity with other ongoing projects in the urban environment, UPSNP will work 
closely with the ULGDP, the Competitiveness and Job Creation (CJC) project and the WEDP. In 
addition the UPSNP will also work jointly with the PSNP on the development of a beneficiary 
registry and MIS for SP programs.

A. PDO 
35. 
The project development objective (PDO) of the proposed project is to support the GoE 
to improve income of targeted poor households and establish urban safety net mechanisms. 
36. 
This will be achieved through provision of cash transfers, financial and technical support 
to access livelihood opportunities, building the capacity of institutions to effectively deliver this 
support, and developing core systems for delivery of safety nets and complementary livelihood 
services. 
B. Project Beneficiaries 
37. 
The GoE is developing a 10-year UPSNP, as an element of the Urban Food Security 
and Job Creation Strategy approved on May 8, 2015, to support over 4.7 million urban 
poor living in 972 cities and towns. It is envisaged that this will be achieved over a long-term 
period through a gradual roll-out plan of different phases starting with big cities having a 
population of over 100,000 people. The proposed Bank support will provide assistance for the 
first five-year phase of the government program and is targeting 11 major cities, Addis Ababa 
and one city from each region (Adama, Assayita, Asosa, Dessie, Dire Dawa, Gambella, 
Hawassa, Harari, Jijiga, and Mekele). In the first phase, 604,000 beneficiaries (the poorest 12 
percent and about 55 percent of people living below the poverty line in these 11 cities) will be 
targeted through a gradual roll-out plan during a five-year period. Given the large size of Addis 
Ababa and the relatively high poverty rates it records, about three-quarters of the beneficiaries 
will be from Addis Ababa. The project will use a combination of targeting mechanisms to 
identify beneficiaries (annex 5).  
C. PDO Level Results Indicators  
38. 
The key results of the project will be measured using the following indicators: 
9 
 
 Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female (percentage) - core  
 Beneficiaries reporting that project investments reflected their needs (percentage), of 
which female (number) and male (number) - core 
 Project beneficiaries under the national poverty line (percentage) 
 Project beneficiaries reporting increased household consumption as a result of the 
project (percentage) 
 Livelihood services beneficiaries who secured a new job or set up/expanded a 
business and are still in the new job/operating the business 12 months later 
(percentage) 
 Number of participating urban local governments (ULGs) reporting improved 
capacity to deliver safety nets and livelihood services as a result of program support

A. Project Components 
39. 
Interventions that meet the varied needs of urban beneficiaries. Continuous income 
support will be provided to elderly and disabled living in households with no working-age 
members, street children, the homeless, and beggars. Additional services to meet the specific 
needs of street children, the homeless, and beggars (access to shelter, healthcare, counseling, and 
often reunification with their families) will also be provided. Income support and services to 
increase employability will be provided to those with too little work or in low-quality 
employment. 
40. 
Integrated model. The UPSNP will adopt a three-phase integrated support pathway 
designed to provide income support and increase employability. In the first phase, beneficiaries 
will receive transfers (conditional on meeting their co-responsibilities) with life skills training 
and guidance on the employment pathway (self-employment and wage employment) to follow. 
In the second phase, conditional transfers will continue and beneficiaries will receive financial 
support, training and job-matching services to increase employability. In the third phase, 
beneficiaries will have the option to continue to receive a small amount of conditional transfers 
to supplement their employment income. Support will be provided for a maximum of three years 
but some beneficiaries may choose to graduate earlier. As this is a first project of this nature in 
urban areas, it is important to acknowledge that the proposed approach (including graduation 
from the program) particularly the livelihood services interventions will be piloted, evaluated, 
course-corrected, and expanded as needed. 
10 
 
Figure 1: Phases of the Integrated Development Pathway5 
 
Source: World Bank staff depiction 
41. 
Based on the integrated model, the proposed project will have three major 
components: (a) Safety Net Support; (b) Livelihood Services; and (c) Institutional Strengthening 
and Project Management. 
Component 1: Safety Net Support (Total US$336.00 million equivalent, of which IDA 
US$224.00 million equivalent, GoE US$112.00 million equivalent) 
42. 
This component will support the delivery of a predictable, timely, and productive 
safety net through conditional and unconditional safety net transfers. The project will ensure 
that various safety net principles such as primacy, adequacy, and predictability of transfer are 
respected. 
43. 
Subcomponent 1.1: Conditional cash transfers. The conditional transfers will target 
able-bodied persons in households eligible for project support. This group constitutes an 
estimated 84 percent of total project beneficiaries. Conditional transfers will require participation 
in PW which can range from small-scale infrastructure to urban greenery development and 
environmental and other services projects. PW that increase skills and productivity of 
beneficiaries will be encouraged. As the program develops, transfers may also be conditional on 
enrolment in tailored training programs aiming at connecting project clients with job or self-
employment opportunities (Component 2).  
44. 
Labor intensive public works. The project will support the financing and development 
of sustainable community assets and public services implemented using labor-intensive methods. 
A menu of PW appropriate for the urban areas and customized to the special environments in 
each of the participating cities will be provided as guidance to the communities in participating 
areas. These may include urban 

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

d; (b) the daily conditional transfer will be 
set lower than the average wage rate received for unskilled work encouraging beneficiaries to 
first pursue other work; and (c) in the first year savings will be encouraged to facilitate 
investments in livelihood activities, complemented with a livelihood grant in the second phase of 
support.  
49. 
Subcomponent 1.2: Unconditional cash transfers. Unconditional transfers will target 
persons who for various reasons are unable to perform work (for example, the chronically ill, the 
elderly, people with disabilities, and the urban destitute). The urban destitute include the target 
group who do not have access to a sustainable livelihood and often resort to begging or illicit 
activities to make a living. Physical and mental health problems affect many in this group. Some 
in this group are very young—children who have run away from homes in rural areas. The 
unconditional transfer beneficiaries will reach up to 16 percent of the total project beneficiaries. 
                                                   
6 Urban Employment and Unemployment Survey 2014, Central Statistical Agency.  
12 
 
50. 
Transfer size. Unconditional transfer beneficiaries will receive ETB 170 per person a 
month (US$8.25 equivalent) or ETB 2,040 per year (about US$100 per year equivalent). This 
has the potential to lift about 48 percent of those in this group out of poverty (annex 2). This 
transfer level is insufficient for people who fall in the urban destitute category (about 2 percent 
of total project beneficiaries). The needs of this group are vast and complex. In addition to 
financial support that can be provided through transfers, they need housing, healthcare, and 
psycho-emotional counseling services. Therefore, the cost of support will need to be significantly 
higher than for the other categories of urban poor. The project will have a dedicated budget line 
to finance pilot projects of specialized service providers to inform an engagement strategy 
tailored to the specific needs of this group. In this regard, it is estimated that a support of ETB 
600 per person per month (about US$29 equivalent) for 12 months and an additional 30 percent 
overhead cost for the provision of this service will be required. 
51. 
Subcomponent 1.3: Safety net mechanisms and systems. The project will also support 
the development of common safety net mechanisms and systems. This will include payment 
systems, targeting, wage rate setting, and market price monitoring. 
52. 
Payment mechanism. The mode of transfer of the project will be cash. The project will 
develop a payment mechanism, in line with the ongoing efforts in modernizing the Ethiopian 
payment system that are led by the Bank Group,  that will use formal financial institutions such 
as banks and microfinance institutions (MFIs) to deliver payments to all beneficiaries. The 
project will also explore options to use electronic payment mechanisms such as mobile money 
transfer. An assessment of how to increase financial inclusion for beneficiaries in a cost-effective 
way will be undertaken before implementation. The project will finance the sensitization and 
training activities that the financial inclusion assessment recommends to ensure all beneficiaries 
can be paid through financial institutions. This increase in financial inclusion will have many 
benefits for beneficiaries in addition to improving the effectiveness, transparency, and recording 
of transfers. 
53. 
Duration and timelines of transfers. Seasonality in the availability of work is modest 
and poor urban households face shortfalls in meeting their basic needs throughout the year. To 
distribute additional income throughout the year and to ensure that beneficiaries are not replacing 
existing economic activities with engagement in their co-responsibilities, conditional and 
unconditional transfers to beneficiaries will be provided evenly throughout the year. Conditional 
transfer payments will be made on a monthly basis after completing the PW and will be 
transferred within a maximum period of 15 days after the end of each month. Unconditional 
transfers will be based on a fixed monthly payment schedule at the end of each month. The 
unconditional beneficiaries will remain in the program throughout the life of the project from 
when they start receiving transfer. The beneficiaries of conditional transfer will be in the 
program for three years. 
54. 
Market price monitoring. The project will closely monitor food prices in urban areas 
using existing data from the Central Statistical Agency. This will inform not only adjustments to 
transfer sizes, but also provide surveillance on possible food price-induced crises, similar to 
those that hit the country in 2008 and 2011. In other words, the monitoring of food prices will 
not only inform design adjustments but also act as an early warning system for the project as a 
whole. In the case of large covariate shocks affecting urban areas, the project will closely 
13 
 
coordinate a required response with the Disaster Risk Management and Food Security Sector of 
the MoA, PSNP, and other programs. 
55. 
Targeting. Project beneficiaries will be identified through a combination of geographic 
targeting, community-based targeting (CBT), proxy means tests (PMTs), and self-selection. 
Although in each city the program will scale to cover all areas of the city in the first year, it will 
target beneficiaries in the poorer parts of the city and expand to other parts of the city in the 
second and third year. Those who have been residing in their current place of residence for 6 
months or more at the start of the targeting process will be considered for the program. Within 
each administrative unit, targeting committees will be established in each community and will 
rank households from poorest to richest; thereby identifying those that will be project 
beneficiaries. This list will be published publicly and verified by implementing a PMT. A final 
list of project beneficiaries will be decided by the community targeting committee after any 
inconsistencies have been discussed. Categorical targeting will be used to determine who is 
eligible for conditional and unconditional transfers. Self-selection will also be used in that 
individuals will determine whether they want to participate given the compensation received in 
return for PW and will decide how many days they will work. Once confirmed as eligible all 
project beneficiaries will receive a client card. The full targeting process is described in annex 5.  
Component 2: Livelihood Services (Total US$79.00 million equivalent, of which IDA 
US$53.00 million equivalent, GoE US$26.00 million equivalent) 
 
56. 
This component will support interventions that will facilitate graduation from the 
program and promote moving out of poverty. The target groups for these interventions are 
individuals in households receiving conditional transfers who desire more and higher-paid work. 
One individual per household can receive this support which will result in a total of 98,000 
individuals eligible for this component. The individual will be selected by the household. The 
support will be implemented by the One Stop Center Directorate (OSCD) in the Urban Food 
Security and Job Creation Agency (UFS&JCA) which established One Stop Centers in 
woredas/kebeles. Some of the functions will be performed in collaboration with MoLSA. 
57. 
Learning and adaptation. Supports for self-employment and wage employment are both 
needed as both are equally important for the poor in urban areas. Evidence suggests that effective 
self-employment support requires both cash transfers and training/mentoring (Blattman and 
Dercon 2015 in Ethiopia, Blattman et al 2015 in Uganda) but there is less evidence on what 
support is effective in supporting wage employment.7 There is a need to learn which approaches 
work the best and adapt the design and roll out of this component accordingly. Learning and 
adaptation will be emphasized in years 1 and 2 and activities will gradually be scaled up to reach 
all eligible individuals.  
58. 
Subcomponent 2.1: Counseling and life-skills development. The first phase of 
livelihoods support will focus on enhancing financial literacy and soft skills that will be useful 
                                                   
7 Blattman, C. and S. Dercon (2015). More sweatshops for Africa? A randomized trial of industrial jobs and self-
employment. Working paper. Blattman, C., J. Annan, E. P. Green, C. Lehmann, and J. Jamison (2015). The returns 
to microenterprise development among the ultra-poor: A field experiment in post-war Uganda. American Economic 
Journal: Applied Economics forthcoming. 
14 
 
across a range of livelihood choices; assessing the technical skills of beneficiaries; and providing 
individuals with information on entrepreneurship and wage opportunities in their location.  
59. 
Financial literacy and soft skills development. To improve employability, beneficiaries 
will receive short trainings on financial literacy and soft skills. The training will encompass how 
to open a bank account, planning, budgeting and saving, attitude and expectations at work, and 
business and workplace readiness. Financial literacy training will be provided to all conditional 
support beneficiaries early on, as part of their co-responsibility for safety net transfers. This is to 
ensure that they are able to save from the income they receive from PW during the first year. The 
project will finance the development of new materials or adaptation of the existing ones, to be 
used where existing materials cannot be used, an assessment of training providers, the training of 
trainers, and the provision of these trainings to beneficiaries. A financial inclusion assessment 
prepared before implementation will inform the design and delivery of the financial literacy 
training. 
60. 
Guidance and counseling. The technical skills and interest of each individual will be 
assessed in the first phase through individual interviews and focus group discussions. Individuals 
will be provided with information on viable entrepreneurship opportunities and the availability of 
jobs. City-level Micro and Small-scale Enterprise Development Agency staff and Labor and 
Social Affairs employment officers will ensure the provision of these services to guide each 
individual on the opportunities that are available to pursue based on his/her skill level and the 
type of training support that will be required. 
61. 
Building capacity. To provide these services, capacity will be built within MoLSA and 
the OSCD at the regional and city levels. The use of private providers and, thus, private 
employment officers, particularly in the provision of information, will be considered based on 
the needs on the ground and the actual capacity available to satisfy the needs. MoLSA 
employment officers are currently expected to provide the type of skills assessment, guidance, 
and counseling services envisaged in this phase, but their capacity to deliver these services is 
limited. Although the reach of the OSCD is larger, its clients are currently more educated than 
the average safety net beneficiary. A capacity assessment will be undertaken in the first year of 
implementation and used to develop a capacity-building plan. Given the need to build capacity, 
10,000 beneficiaries will receive this service in the first year of the project with more receiving 
this support at the beginning of year 2. The project will also finance the development of new 
skills assessment tools and manuals for staff and invest in additional engagement with the private 
sector to access more information on job openings and to spread it quickly to a city-wide 
network of employment offices, in the early months of implementation. This will improve upon 
the existing system in which information is available only in selected locations. The project will 
also experiment with dissemination of job alerts to mobile phones. 
62. 
Subcomponent 2.2: Financial support and training for livelihood development. In 
the second phase of livelihoods support, individuals who received guidance in the first phase will 
choose whether they would like to receive support to increase their income from self-
employment (either by starting a business or increasing the profitability of an existing business) 
or wage employment (either by gaining access to wage employment or moving from low- to 
higher-wage employment). They will receive financial support to pursue this livelihood pathway 
upon completion of a plan accepted by the relevant OSCD and MoLSA staff. The plan will be 
15 
 
accepted if it is realistic in terms of viability of activities envisaged and reflects the skills the 
individual has. In addition to financial support, individuals will receive the information, 
mentoring, and training necessary to develop and implement a plan. 
63. 
Value of support. Individuals will receive up to ETB 10,000 of support (approximately 
US$500). The exact value of the support that they will receive will depend on the amount needed 
to fund the plan developed. In addition to the grant provided, it is expected that households will 
be able to support livelihood activities from savings from the first year of transfers. Existing data 
suggests that on average, beneficiaries will be able to save ETB 2,000 from the first year of 
transfers.  
64. 
Self-employment. The beneficiaries under this track will receive training on 
entrepreneurship and business development to develop an accepted business plan for the 
livelihood grant. The provision of these trainings will be facilitated by the OSCD. It is 
anticipated that the majority of these training programs will be provided by public TVET but an 
assessment of training providers will be undertaken to determine whether private TVET and 
NGOs should also be considered. In addition, the OSCD will facilitate access to the workspace, 
market linkage services, and other licensing services that may be needed for the business plan to 
succeed, through its network of one-stop service centers. It is expected that self-employment 
pathway beneficiaries will largely start up with household enterprises of a very small scale and 
will need handholding to ensure they can cope with start-up challenges and continue. The OSCD 
will thus work with small business regulators to ensure that any advantages accruing to such 
small businesses will be accessed. 
65. 
Wage employment. Under the wage employment track, livelihood grants can cover a 
stipend to attend training to build skills for a wage job (ETB 40 a day stipend, training fees will 
not be covered by the livelihood grant but will be paid separately by the project); an allowance to 
travel to job interviews until a job is secured; and/or an allowance to travel to work or cover the 
ancillary costs of employment such as child-care expenses. The rationale for providing the 
allowance during early work days is that individuals gain useful experience in the early days of a 
new job even though the net take-home pay may be late or low and persistence can be 
encouraged. Improving the functioning of the TVET system is beyond the scope of this project. 
However, the program will undertake an assessment of training providers in year 1 to determine 
what can be provided and will assess that training is indeed met with improved skills for 
beneficiaries. Private training centers within the industrial zones are due to be established as part 
of the CJC project. These centers may offer a better opportunity to program beneficiaries and 
linkages will be explored in program implementation. 
66. 
Technical support and monitoring. Given the complexity of this component and the 
fact that it is the first large-scale program to increase the employability of poor households in 
urban areas, the project will support monitoring, evaluation, and technical support. The success 
of this component will depend on strong technical support packages and capacity building to 
ensure staff with the necessary skills are available to implement it. Evaluation of pilots in the 
early years of implementation is necessary to ensure that the package of support offered 
incorporates lessons from implementation in the early years before scaling up to a larger number 
of beneficiaries in the later years of the project (see Component 3). 
16 
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management (Total US$35 million 
equivalent, of which IDA US$23 million equivalent, GoE US$12 million equivalent) 
 
67. 
This component will support the development and strengthening of project systems 
for targeting, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and MIS, payments, and citizens’ 
engagement (CE). It will also finance capacity building (human resource, training, 
administrative, and physical capacity) and strengthening program management (coordination, 
financial management (FM), procurement, and safeguards). 
68. 
Subcomponent 3.1: Operational system development. A number of system 
development activities will be supported by the project. The main ones will include systems for 
(a) M&E, (b) FM, (c) human resources management, (d) targeting, and (e) MIS.  
69. 
Link with PSNP. Ethiopia is moving toward the development of key building blocks, 
tools, and instruments for a SP system, in line with the recently approved Social Protection 
Policy and Strategy. Many of these tools will be financed by PSNP 4, including the development 
of a single registry and significant investments in information management. The UPSNP will use 
many of these tools but will also be an important financier of some of these building blocks.  
70. 
MIS. The project will finance a program-specific MIS, which will provide credible 
information for decision making to program managers and implementers. Over time, this MIS 
will be harmonized with the MIS of the UFS&JCA and the PSNP.  The MIS will include PW 
and livelihoods databases and, given the decentralized nature of Ethiopia and the program, will 
be developed to be functional at both the federal and city levels. Establishing the MIS will 
require training and investments in information and communication technology at all levels.  
71. 
Subcomponent 3.2: Capacity building. The UPSNP is being led by an institution which 
has not been involved in safety nets design and implementation in the past. The project will thus 
require targeted continuous and fast-tracked capacity development and institutional 
strengthening as part of implementation. Capacity-building and skills-enhancement activities for 
the parent and other ministries that will be closely involved, as well as for other institutions at 
federal, regional, and city levels, are a priority. The capacity-development activities are expected 
to ensure that the primary managers, implementers, and stakeholders of the UPSNP have the 
required awareness levels for safety nets in general and urban safety nets in particular and impart 
them with skills to successfully deliver their roles.  
72. 
Project Preparation Advance (PPA). A PPA was processed and approved in June 2015. 
The PPA is financing (a) preparatory implementation and capacity-building activities including 
staffing, logistics and equipment, sensitization, and awareness raising for the core institutions 
that are involved in coordinating the project (MUDHo, MoLSA, UFS&JCA); (b) development of 
manuals and guidelines including a project implementation manual (PIM), guidelines for 
different project components, and FM and procurement manuals; (c) development of important 
delivery mechanisms such as targeting, payment systems, and M&E; (d) preparation of social 
and environment safeguard instruments and social impact assessments (SIAs); and (e) 
establishment of  project management and coordination arrangements.