[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 54199 chars (22.6% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
1. 
Ethiopia is a large, landlocked, and diverse country. It is located in the Horn of Africa with an 
area of 1.1 million km2. Ethiopia’s population is estimated at 96.95 million, with an annual population 
growth rate of 2.5 percent (2014).1 At this rate, Ethiopia’s population is expected to reach 130 million by 
2025, and the United Nations projects that it will become the tenth most populous country in the world 
by 2050. According to the World Bank Group estimation in 2015, only about 20 percent of the 
population lives in urban centers. Ethiopia is a country of many nations, nationalities, and peoples, with 
about 98 nationalities and peoples with roughly 93 languages. At the time of the writing of this 
document, the country is in a nationwide state of emergency declared by the Government of Ethiopia 
(GoE) on October 9, 2016 for six  months in light of growing concerns related to internal security 
following months of anti-government protests. 
2. 
The sustained economic growth for the last decade,  with an average gross domestic product  
growth rate of 10.9 percent from 2005–15,was driven primarily by structural improvements in the 
economy, as resources moved from low- to high-productivity activities, supported by a conducive 
external environment.2 International trade has been very dynamic with exports increasing more than 
fivefold between 2000 and 2015 in nominal terms, while volumes increased by a magnitude of four, 
reflecting a positive commodity price effect. Imports increased by a factor of 8 over the same period. 
While the Government has recently laid out ambitious plans to maintain this growth performance and 
for Ethiopia to become a middle-income country by 2025, the global external environment has become 
less conducive, faltering export performance has become a key policy concern, and the country is facing 
the challenge of dealing with the current drought. 
3. 
However, higher economic growth underpinned by both manufacturing output and value 
added exports will be needed. At current, most employment opportunities in the country and about 40 
percent of output and exports are related to agriculture, whereas services make up close to 50 percent 
of output value and exports,3 respectively. The emerging Ethiopian light manufacturing sector, 
dominated by the food, beverage, leather, textile, and apparel industries, has remained stagnant at 
around 5 percent shares of output, employment, and exports.4 As emphasized in the 4th Ethiopia 
Economic Update (World Bank Group 2015), growth in the manufacturing sector is critical for sustained 
long-term growth of a country graduating through the early stages of industrial development. 
Manufacturing bears the potential to create new and better-paying jobs and related services and to 
reallocate workers from the low productive agriculture and the informal sectors to more productive and 
formal economic activities. 
                                            
1 World Development Indicators based on United Nations population projection. According to the Central Statistics Agency, 
the midyear population estimate is 90.1 million in 2015. 
2 Ethiopia Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) (World Bank Group 2016) 
3 Within services, commerce, public sector, and ‘others services’ were the most important contributors to output and jobs. 
Ethiopia’s Great Run (World Bank Group 2016). 
4 Ethiopia SCD (World Bank Group 2016). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia: National Quality Infrastructure Development Project (P160279) 
 
 
 
 
Page 2  
     
 
4. 
Increasing manufacturing, specifically exports of manufactured goods, is among the major 
targets of the Government of Ethiopia (GoE), as indicated in the Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP) 
second phase, which sets out an ambitious vision that seeks to turn Ethiopia into a middle-income 
country by 2025. Emphasis is on the development of export-oriented light manufacturing, in particular 
labor-intensive industries to take advantage of the country’s relative abundance of labor, low wages, 
and raw materials. The GoE’s priority industries include, among others, textiles and garments, leather, 
and leather products, and agro-processing products. Though relatively small in export share currently, 
these sectors have shown their potential over the last five years as evidenced by the increase of the 
compound annual growth rate (CAGR) at 10.8 percent (food products), 7.3 percent (leather and other 
leather products), 33.8 percent (footwear), and 19.6 percent (textiles and garments), respectively (for 
details, see figure 4.1 and 4.2 of annex 4 section 1). 
 B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
Ethiopian National Quality Infrastructure System 
5. 
Given the strategic emphasis on the growth of light manufacturing, fostering awareness and 
adherence of Ethiopian firms, specifically exporters, to international product standards and 
certification regimes is more crucial than ever. It will help them meet global standards and quality 
practices, as they operate within integrated global value chains (GVCs), where products and services 
require quality assurance.5 Many of the major export destinations of Ethiopian light manufacturing 
products are developed markets, such as the United States, European Union (EU), and Asia, where 
higher standards and quality practices are required than those applied domestically. For details see 
annex 4 section 2. 
6. 
In addition, a functioning system to assess the quality of materials inputs (imported or locally 
produced) is critical. So far, the lack of adequate National Quality Infrastructure (NQI)6 has severely 
constrained the ability of Ethiopian firms to produce goods and services that meet the quality 
specifications of global markets. Though primarily focused on agricultural commodities, Ethiopian 
products face rejection in the markets in developed countries mainly due to pesticide residue, 
mycotoxin content, insufficient hygienic condition, and inappropriate labelling.7 For instance, during the 
2010–2015 period, there were 19 notifications of rejections of products (fruits and vegetables, herbs 
and spices, nuts and nut products, and cereals) from destination markets in Europe.8 To a large extent, 
these rejections concern agricultural products, but they are also indicative of quality problems in other 
sectors, in particular light manufacturing. While the reasons for rejection vary from market to market 
and have to be addressed primarily by reforms at the sectoral level, such reforms need to take place 
within the framework of a broader quality assurance system for testing, inspection, and certification of 
product quality. The 2016 draft Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (DTIS) points out the failure to meet 
                                            
5 Guasch, Luis J., Jean-Louis Racine, Isabel Sánchez, and Makhtar Diop. 2007. Quality Systems and Standards for a Competitive 
Edge. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
6 NQI is defined as an institutional framework that establishes and implements a number of interlinked activities among 
standardization, accreditation, metrology, and conformity assessment (testing, inspection, and certification). 
7 Draft- DTIS of Ethiopia, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), January 2016. 
8 European Commission’s Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed (RASFF): https://webgate.ec.europa.eu/rasff-
window/portal/?event=SearchForm&cleanSearch=1  
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia: National Quality Infrastructure Development Project (P160279) 
 
 
 
 
Page 3  
     
 
the standards and quality as one of the major issues prevailing in most Ethiopian manufacturing 
industries.  
7. 
Basic elements of the NQI system have been put in place in Ethiopia. Under the reform 
undertaken in 2011, the former Quality and Standards Authority of Ethiopia was divided into four legally 
autonomous NQI institutions, responsible for providing quality assurance services in the fields of 
standards, accreditation, metrology, and conformity assessment (testing, inspection, and certification) 
to ensure good governance, create institutions free from conflicts of interest9 and be aligned with the 
international practice. The Ministry of Science and Technology (MoST) is the responsible ministry for 
NQI service development in the country and is responsible for the oversight of the four existing NQI 
service providing institutions (See Figure 1. Below):  
i. Ethiopian Standards Agency (ESA) in charge of adoption and dissemination of national, 
international, and company specific standards; 
ii. Ethiopian National Accreditation Office (ENAO), responsible for issuing accreditation of 
technical competency of laboratories and conformity assessment bodies; 
iii. National Metrology Institute of Ethiopia (NMIE) providing calibration services for 
laboratories to assure measuring equipment meets standards; and  
iv. Ethiopian Conformity Assessment Enterprise (ECAE) - a state owned enterprise providing 
testing, certification, or inspection services for products/services – to be complemented by 
private service providers.   
8. 
In addition to these four public NQI service providers, there are regulatory functions within 
various ministries, including the Ministry of Trade (MoT), Ministry of Health, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Natural Resource (MoANR), and Ministry of Industry (MoI) to oversee compliance with mandatory 
regulations particularly in areas related to public health and safety. The various institutions and 
functions in the NQI are formally coordinated under the National Quality Infrastructure Technical 
Committee (NQITC), chaired by the Minister of MoST with the Ministry of Trade (MoT) as its secretary. 
In addition, the Government has established the NQI Forum, as a platform for dialogue between the NQI 
institutions, key stakeholders, and the private sector. 
9. 
Recognizing the importance of the NQI, the Government’s Science, Technology, and 
Innovation Policy underscores the importance of the NQI for the country’s growth strategy and has 
formulated eight broad strategies to strengthen the NQI. The GoE is currently updating its NQI 
development strategy (2016–2021) to meet its GTP II goals, with the support of the World Bank Group. 
The strategy will provide the implementation strategy of the Government’s policy on the NQI and will 
enable further development of the system to respond to the needs of the manufacturing sector to 
become globally competitive. One critical aspect of the strategy is to clarify and ensure that there is 
proper division of responsibilities and mandates between service providers and ministries responsible 
for regulatory oversight within the NQI system. It is important that the inspection and laboratory 
capacity established by line ministries for the purpose of executing their oversight function should not 
                                            
9 Quality and Standards Authority of Ethiopia was responsible for the development and approval of standards, product 
certification, inspection of producers, market surveillance, and consumer protection. As the entire process was controlled by 
one organization, the overlap of commercial and regulatory functions and the discretionary powers of the organization to 
control the certification market create considerable risk of conflicts of interest. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia: National Quality Infrastructure Development Project (P160279) 
 
 
 
 
Page 4  
     
 
cause inefficiencies because of costly duplication of investments in facilities and equipment, increased 
pressure on the limited pool of skilled experts available in the country, and lastly, non-optimal utilization 
of expensive laboratory equipment and limited resources, both finance and human resource. 
Figure 1. Relationships among Elements of the NQI 
 
Note: HACCP = Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points 
10. 
Despite efforts by the GoE, the service delivery capacity of the existing Ethiopian NQI 
institutions is inadequate to support the competitiveness of industries. There are key areas and 
parameters for which no national calibration and testing are available, and certificates that none of 
these institutions is accredited to provide. The NQI institutions lack capacity in human resources, the 
facility to ensure accurate measurement, well-equipped laboratories to meet industries’ demands, as 
well as coordination and collaboration with regulatory bodies to implement quality assurance services 
because the NQITC is not yet fully operationalized (see annex 4 section 3 for inadequacies that hinder 
promoting and strengthening the use of NQI services among the private sector and section 4 for 
comparison of the NQI services capacity with benchmark countries).  
11. 
Limited internationally recognized services of the NQI institutions are also identified as key 
bottlenecks for supporting competitiveness of its exporters. The quality assurance of goods or services 
confirmed by Ethiopian NQI institutions only facilitates trade if recognized by relevant foreign 
conformity assessment bodies. Otherwise, exports need to be certified/tested/inspected again in the 
destination country or are blocked at the border. Currently, NMIE’s calibration and ENAO’s10 
                                            
10 ENAO has been audited for a full membership for the International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation (ILAC) in 2015, and 
a signatory to the Mutual Recognition Arrangement (MRA) of the ILAC on scope of testing International Standards Organization 
(ISO)/ International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 17025 and medical testing ISO 15189 is under way. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia: National Quality Infrastructure Development Project (P160279) 
 
 
 
 
Page 5  
     
 
accreditation services, which are critical for providing globally accepted conformity assessment services 
in Ethiopia, are not internationally recognized.  
12. 
In addition, the lack of coordination and collaboration in NQI service development with 
industries undermines the effectiveness of the NQI. Though the NQI Forum has been put in place, it is 
not yet fully operational, which hinders the active engagement of the private sector to provide input and 
feedback on the NQI services and the challenges to the NQI institutions and the regulatory agencies. 
Understanding industries’ demands is critical to create demand-driven NQI institutions with sustainable 
services. 
13. 
Furthermore, it is critical to create an environment that will encourage private sector 
investments that create market oriented conformity assessment services sector. There are very few 
private sector conformity assessment service providers active in Ethiopia. Because domestic demands 
for the NQI services are still underdeveloped to be significantly attractive for private investors, the GoE 
currently supports ECAE’s basic conformity assessment services to solve a market mismatch between 
supply and demand in industry. The international trend however is for governments to withdraw from 
such basic conformity assessment service provision as the private sector develops. The strategic 
approach is to provide practical hands-on support to industry players and potential private NQI service 
providers for creating demands for NQI services and recognizing the benefit to enter the conformity 
assessment services.  
14. 
The quality assurance services in the fields of standards, accreditation, and metrology are 
commonly considered as a public good because it essentially helps solve market failures. Standards 
developed to provide fulfillment of technical requirements (mandatory or voluntary) result in additional 
costs for compliance for developing countries that export to these markets. The incremental cost may 
be a decisive factor for an individual firm’s ability to become competitive globally. In such a context, 
policy solutions, such as public support for the development of the NQI will help offset the cost 
disadvantages.11 Leaving standards to markets alone can lead to under- or over-provision of standards. 
The market failures also include coordination issues and imperfect markets that are too costly to be 
undertaken by the private sector only and justify public sector interventions as a public good. For 
example, leaving the metrology system to markets alone can lead to underinvestment that cannot 
effectively meet accurate measurements (weight, volume, length, and so on), particularly in developing 
countries like Ethiopia where manufacturers are predominantly small and medium enterprises (SMEs). 
Investment in metrology involves high fixed costs but the outputs of the investment may have quite 
general applicability for a wide and diverse group of users. Furthermore, ENAO’s accreditation services 
can be seen as a public good because it allows for the creation of a reliable market of conformity 
assessment. Though private entities can provide basic conformity assessment services, their success 
depends on public support for increasing the demands for services from industries and the upstream 
developments of metrology, accreditation, and standardization.  
15. 
The proposed project is being designed within this context to support the Government in 
addressing the major constraints around the NQI system in the country. It will focus on three key value 
chains that are driving the Government’s industrial policy for the growth of export-based 
                                            
11 Maskus, Keith E., Tsunehiro Otsuki, and John S. Wilson. 2005. The Cost of Compliance With Product Standards For Firms In 
Developing Countries, Policy Research Working Paper 3590, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia: National Quality Infrastructure Development Project (P160279) 
 
 
 
 
Page 6  
     
 
industrialization, that is, (a) leather and leather products; (b) textile and garments; and (c) agro-
processed products. A value chain approach will be effective when buyers and sellers rely on complex 
information that is not easily transmitted or learned. (Annex 4 section 5 highlights the relevance of 
quality assurance for each of these three industries in light of the sectors that the project aims to 
address).  
16. 
These three value chains have been selected as priority sectors under the project for the 
following main reasons: (a) the GoE has clearly identified them in GTP II as its priory sectors for the 
development of export-led manufacturing industries that will support growth and job creation and is 
making significant investments to develop them; (b) the expected significant impact of quality assurance 
services, especially in the value chain (forward and backward linkages), to comply with buyers’ 
standards and requirements; (c) the increasing trend and potential growth in investments,12 export 
value, and volume as well as product sophistication and diversity projecting increasing demand for 
efficient and competent NQI services for the products; and (d) relative readiness (high potential) of the 
NQI institutions to provide quality assurance services to these sectors, building on their existing services 
and facilities. As NQI services have to be demand driven and sustainable, heavy investment to support 
brand new sectors will not result in adequate demand in the near and medium term, and it will be 
difficult to sustain technically competent services.  
17. 
Enhancing the effectiveness of the quality assurance services in the targeted sectors will also 
help address challenges by creating an objective and transparent system in the value chains. For 
instance, lack of objective quality grading rules in the hides and skins trading system in Ethiopia causes 
mistrust between traders and tanneries that substantially reduces the volume of transactions in raw 
hides and skins, leading to supply problems.13 Also, nonexistence of a reliable testing mechanism on use 
of chemicals, restricted substances, and physical analysis (weight, color, shape, contraction, display, and 
so on) results in inefficient production in the textile and garments and agro-processing sectors.14  
   C. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes 
18. 
The proposed project will contribute to the achievement of the GoE’s growth strategy 
formulated within GTP II, which focuses on structural transformation from an agrarian to an 
industrialized economy. Improving the export sector is among the major targets of the Government in 
its growth strategy. In this regard, high attention has been given, particularly, to increasing value-added 
exports from the selected priority industries to potential markets such as Europe, the United States, and 
the Middle East by improving product quality, grading, and standards.  
19. 
The project is well anchored within Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) Pillar 1 and the World 
Bank Group’s target of shared prosperity and reduction of extreme poverty. The current CPS FY13–
FY16 framework includes two pillars. Pillar 1, ‘Fostering competitiveness and employment’, aims to 
support Ethiopia in achieving: (a) a stable macroeconomic environment; (b) increased competitiveness 
                                            
12 Investments in these sectors are growing at an increasing rate and the GoE has put in place an ambitious Industrial parks 
development agenda to meet the demand for land and production facilities. Ethiopia is a beneficiary of the African Growth 
Opportunity Act and the Everything But Arms preferential trade treaties which play a key role in investment attraction.    
13 Ethiopian Development Research Institute Working Paper 011 (December 2013). 
14 Business Opportunity Report Ethiopia - Textile and Apparel Industry (Netherlands Embassy in Ethiopia and NAS International 
BV, 2015). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia: National Quality Infrastructure Development Project (P160279) 
 
 
 
 
Page 7  
     
 
and productivity; (c) increased and improved delivery of infrastructure; and (d) enhanced regional 
integration. The SCD, which will inform the new Country Partnership Framework (FY17–FY20), has 
identified the need for faster and more inclusive structural change to end extreme poverty and promote 
shared prosperity in Ethiopia. To achieve this, the SCD has identified low human development and an 
uncompetitive private sector among the most binding constraints that need to be addressed to succeed 
in the structural transformation. 
20. 
The project will indirectly contribute to the World Bank Group’s strategic objectives of ending 
extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity by supporting economic growth: It will enhance the 
global competitiveness of selected sectors that will increase the demand for Ethiopian products, which 
will require increasing investments and expanding production, resulting in job creation. In addition, the 
project will contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals on (a) promoting 
inclusive and sustainable economic growth, employment, and decent work for all (Goal 8); (b) building 
resilient infrastructure, promoting sustainable industrialization, and fostering innovation (Goal 9); (c) 
reducing inequality within and among countries (Goal 10); and (d) ensuring sustainable consumption 
and production patterns (Goal 12).

A. PDO 
21. 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the delivery of quality assurance 
services to enterprises in targeted sectors. 
22. 
The theory of change for the proposed project is that both improved delivery of quality 
assurance services by NQI institutions (supply side) and increased demand by targeted enterprises in the 
targeted sectors, both the private and public sectors, for these services (demand-side) will strengthen 
the competitiveness of the selected industries in GVCs. The targeted sectors will be leather and leather 
products, textile and garments, and agro-processing. 
B. Project Beneficiaries  
23. 
The direct beneficiaries of the project interventions include the private sector (particularly 
existing and potential exporters), private NQI service providers, regulatory authorities, and 
consumers. With the goal of improving the delivery of the quality assurance services to targeted 
manufacturing sectors, the project beneficiaries will include enterprises/manufacturers, producers who 
work for enterprises/manufacturers in the same value chains, and private NQI service providers. Also, 
the project would contribute to the increase of market surveillance capacity of regulatory agencies, as 
these agencies often rely on testing of product standards/quality. In addition, the project will benefit 
local consumers, as the development of the NQI will protect consumers from hazardous and incompliant 
consumable products that may have detrimental effects on health and safety.  
C. PDO-Level Results Indicators 
24. 
To measure the results and achievements of the project toward the PDO, the proposed 
outcome indicators are 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia: National Quality Infrastructure Development Project (P160279) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8  
     
 
 
Number of enterprises that used NQI institutions’ quality assurance services (disaggregated by 
sector) 
 
Average number of days required to obtain selected calibration and testing services 
 
Number of accredited/internationally recognized services provided by NQI institutions 
 
Volume of services delivered to customers by NQI institutions  
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia: National Quality Infrastructure Development Project (P160279) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9

A. Project Components 
25. 
The main development challenges in the NQI in Ethiopia are the lack of adequate capacity to 
provide quality assurance services, inability to meet target market standards, prohibitive costs of 
compliance with international standards, and poor protection of public good elements. As the project 
will not be able to address all the challenges, it aims to focus the key interventions on improving the 
delivery of quality assurance services for selected priority sectors to contribute to the country’s growth 
led by export-focused manufacturing, while stimulating demands for these from industries by becoming 
active users of the services and potential service providers.  
26. 
The proposed project is structured around three components: (a) Component 1: Strengthening 
Institutional Capacity for NQI Development; (b) Component 2: Enhancing Private Sector Engagement; 
and (c) Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation. By addressing the gaps in 
the supply side and demand side of the quality assurance services, each component will leverage the 
inputs and outputs of other project components to develop an integrated solution and ensure that the 
development objective of the project is realized in an integrated manner. See annex 1 for more detail. 
Component 1: Strengthening Institutional Capacity for NQI Development (US$38,200,000, equivalent 
to SDR 28,420,800) 
27. 
The objective of this component is to strengthen the NQI institutions’ capacity to deliver 
effective and efficient quality assurance services to enterprises in the targeted sectors. This 
component will have two subcomponents: (a) Strengthening Institutional Capacity of NQI Institutions 
and (b) Strengthening MoST’s NQI Oversight Function. The main areas of intervention of this component 
are to support technical and human capacity development and to upgrade the selected technical and 
physical facilities of existing NQI institutions and MoST’s NQI function. This will help strengthen the 
quality assurance system and address the existing gaps in meeting the current demands of the industry.  
Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening Institutional Capacity of NQI Institutions  
28. 
This subcomponent will primarily aim at building and strengthening of technical and human 
capital ESA, ENAO, NMIE, and ECAE. This will be achieved through the implementation of the following 
main activities, among others:  
(a) Support for achieving international recognition of Ethiopian NQI  
(b) Support for expansion of scope of services relevant to the targeted sectors  
(c) 
Development of technical skills and provision of trainings to technical experts and 
management to enable effective and efficient services by said NQI institutions  
(d) Development of strategic road maps, business plans, and guidelines to ensure 
sustainability of the NQI services  
(e) Carrying out workshops, international conferences, and overseas study tours for active 
participation in international memberships and exchange of knowledge  
(f) 
Strengthening of an information and communication technology (ICT) system that 
improves service delivery and monitoring and evaluation (M&E)  
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia: National Quality Infrastructure Development Project (P160279) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10  
     
 
(g) Twinning arrangements with internationally recognized NQI agencies for longer term and 
sustainable quality assurance services and human capital development 
29. 
This subcomponent will also support the upgrading of the technical and physical facilities of 
NMIE and ECAE to improve the provision of quality assurance services, primarily for the targeted 
industries. This intervention will support the procurement of critical specialized equipment and goods to 
run the key testing and calibration laboratories and refurbished and renovation of facilities to be fit for 
purpose. Once the facilities are renovated and become functional, each institution will allocate 
necessary budget from its treasury resources and/or own income annually, as is currently the practice, 
to cover operational and maintenance costs. 
Subcomponent 1.2: Strengthening MoST’s NQI Oversight Function 
30. 
This subcomponent will aim at strengthening the institutional capacity of MoST to carry out its 
mandate on NQI development and coordination. To this end, the MoST has set up a dedicated 
directorate to oversee and coordinate NQI development in the country that will also ensure ownership, 
long-term sustainability of the project interventions, and financial and quality sustainability of services. 
Main project activities will include the following:  
(a) Training and technical assistance to MoST staff carrying out NQI functions.  
(b) Recruitment of short term and long term expert consultants to support the work of said 
functions.  
(c) Technical assistance for the facilitation and management of NQI TC and NQI Forum, where the 
directorate will serve as secretariat on behalf of the MoST;  
(d) Development and upgrading of the educational materials and curricula on NQI, currently being 
piloted at selected universities;  
(e) Provision of goods and services to support the operation of the NQI function as needed and  
(f) Setting up an effective monitoring and tracking system for monitoring the quality improvement 
of Ethiopian products, for instance, by using consumer testing organizations in main export 
destination countries.  
Component 2: Enhancing Private Sector Engagement (US$7,300,000, equivalent to SDR 5,431,200) 
31. 
The objective of this component is to support more active private sector involvement for the 
development of NQI systems in terms of creation of the demand for NQI services and increase of the 
number of private sector NQI service providers, in particular conformity assessment services. To 
achieve this, activities provided to the industry players and potential private NQI service providers need 
to be hands-on support underpinned by practical experiences in relevant industries, so that they will see 
the results of their investments in a relatively short amount of time, use the NQI services regularly, and 
decide to enter the NQI service markets. This component will have three main subcomponents: 
Subcomponent 2.1: Technical Assistance and Training to Industries  
32. 
The objective of this subcomponent is to create industry (particularly producers within the 
selected sectors) awareness and knowledge on quality thereby facilitating increased demand for 
quality assurance services aligned with export market requirements. Project interventions are 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia: National Quality Infrastructure Development Project (P160279) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11  
     
 
designed to respond to the industries’ need to develop an in-depth knowledge and understanding of 
quality assurance systems and develop products and services that meet international standards and 
requirements. By doing so, the component will support compliance to quality standards, create 
awareness and knowledge among the business communities and consumers about the attributes of 
standards and quality practices and better understanding of international market and buyers 
requirements. This will contribute to increased competitiveness in international trade, as it will result in 
lower rejection rates and downgrading of Ethiopian products by international buyers and thus help 
enhance the reputation of the Ethiopian products and increase the trust between sellers and buyers. 
Project activities will include, inter alia, the following: 
(a) Exeprtise will be sourced from relevant institutions,  such as the chamber of commerce, sector 
associations, laboratory associations, NQI Institutions, for industry needs assessment;  
(b) Provision of technical assistance to industries to meet compliance requirements;  
(c) Development of training materials, training of trainers from relevant agencies (such as sectoral  
institutes, associations, etc) and training of industries on standards and compliance 
requirements;  
(d) Development of industrial parks -pilot program to carry out feasibility studies to identify market 
demand and opportunities for quality assurance services.  
 Subcomponent 2.2: Technical Support to Private Sector NQI Service Providers 
33. 
As the NQI matures, the private sector will play a significant role in the provision of services 
such as testing and certification; while the public sector 

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

 consultants’ services, goods and technical assistance.  
37. 
MoST will need to strengthen its capacity to effectively implement this project. The Ministry 
does not have prior experience implementing IDA financed project. The institutional assessments 
indicate a need for enhanced technical and fiduciary capacity at MoST to build an effective and 
competent team that is capable of implementing an IDA financed project. This requires the Ministry to 
allocate sufficient funds to recruit experienced project staff, and bring in technical experts who can 
provide the required skills and expertise that will effectively work with the multiple stakeholders and 
beneficiaries of the project.   
38. 
The achievement of the PDO depends on effective and efficient implementation of all project 
interventions. Support will be provided to the MoST and the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to 
strengthen its capacity and increase human resources required for project implementation. The MoST 
will be the implementing agency for the project as the oversight ministry for the main NQI institutions 
with the mandate to coordinate the various entities involved in the NQI. This component of the project 
will finance (a) consultants employed as part of the PIU, including a project coordinator, a procurement 
specialist, a financial management (FM) specialist,  safeguards specialist, an M&E specialist, and 
technical experts that may be needed; (b) required goods and services to support the functioning of the 
PIU as needed, including office equipment and furniture; (c) operating costs for the PIU incurred on 
account of project implementation; (d) data collection, customer satisfaction surveys, and assessment 
surveys; and (e) all project-related audits. 
39. 
The project management includes setting up of an effective M&E system to track results of the 
project. A key aspect of the project management will be to establish an effective M&E system early on 
during project implementation that will enable regular and reliable tracking of project results, carry out 
necessary surveys and assessments, and regularly report on the outputs, outcomes, and impacts of the 
project interventions. An experienced and competent M&E specialist will be hired on a full-time basis.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia: National Quality Infrastructure Development Project (P160279) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13  
     
 
B. Project Cost and Financing 
Project Components 
Total Project Cost 
(US$) 
Component 1: Strengthening Institutional Capacity for NQI Development 
1.1: Strengthening Institutional Capacity of NQI Institutions 
1.2: Strengthening MoST’s NQI Oversight Function 
38,200,000 
Component 2: Enhancing Private Sector Engagement 
2.1: Providing Training and Technical Assistance (TA) to Industries  
2.2: Providing Technical Support and Assistance to Private Sector NQI Service Providers  
2.3: Strengthening the Feedback and Dialogue Mechanism  
7,300,000 
Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation 
4,500,000 
Total IDA Financing 
50,000,000 
Total Project Costs15 
Front End Fees 
Total Financing Required 
50,000,000 
0 
50,000,000 
C. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project design 
40. 
The project design builds on the one hand on the lessons learned from NQI investment 
projects implemented globally by the World Bank Group, as well as development partners. Similar to 
all new projects, NQI-focused projects require strong and sustained political commitment, a supportive 
policy and institutional environment, solid preparatory work and appropriate design, and close 
implementation follow-up. In addition, the main lessons learned from NQI-focused projects are the 
following: 
(a) Addressing the gaps in demand and supply of quality assurance services in parallel. NQI 
service delivery needs to meet a demonstrated demand from industries, as the 
involvement of industries is a prerequisite for the development of the demanded NQI 
services. The project design should take this into account, and support the development of 
both supply and demand of NQI services in parallel. 
(b) Importance of institutional development. Institution building and skills improvement of 
NQI institutions are as important as the availability of modern equipment. Setting up 
twinning arrangements with internationally recognized NQI agencies in other countries 
could be a highly effective tool to accelerate institutional development for sustainable 
engagement and to speed up the learning curve.  
(c) 
Creation of awareness of the NQI. Information and services related to quality assurance 
need to be actively disseminated to create awareness of such requirements and facilitate 
the implementation and adoption of necessary standards and quality practices by firms. 
                                            
15 MoST will provide counterpart contribution, mostly in kind, to cover administrative costs and strengthen institutional 
safeguard measures over the project period. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia: National Quality Infrastructure Development Project (P160279) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14  
     
 
For this purpose, it is important to establish a constructive dialogue with stakeholders, 
particularly the private sector, in the policies and provision of the NQI services that 
respond to customers’ needs. 
(d) Introducing a value chain approach. In countries where the NQI is at an early stage of 
development, the sector-specific value chain approach will be particularly beneficial. A 
value chain approach will help identify the real needs of customers of quality assurance 
services for key industries at the core of the project, increasing the chance that key 
challenges are addressed and smart investments made that will increase the 
competitiveness of the industries and enable firms to market their products successfully in 
international markets.  
41. 
On the other hand, the project design also addresses particular lessons from project 
implementation in Ethiopia. These include ensuring the sustainability of project interventions and 
results after the project closeout; ensuring the institutionalization of the project within the 
implementing agency/ministry; and ensuring ownership and institutional capacity by incorporating 
ministry staff as part of the project management team. The NQI Development Project will assist the 
Government in the implementation of its NQI strategy, and will invest significantly in institutional 
development. One important aspect of the support is the strengthening and empowerment of the NQI 
development and coordination function within the MoST. This is to ensure that the project builds the 
institutions around NQI development and ensure ownership and sustainability of the program after the 
project closes. The project will be implemented by the beneficiary institutions to strengthen their own 
institutions and technical capacities, while the fiduciary responsibility to meet World Bank Group’s 
requirements and policies will be supported by project-specific staff.  
42. 
The project design has considered alternatives for the provision of quality assurance services 
that support export competitiveness. The project considered two alternative options: (a) allow the 
market to attract private sector investment in the NQI and (b) encourage/support the GoE to use 
regional NQI service providers to serve its industries. As noted earlier, the NQI requires significant 
capital investment and technical competency, which does not make it an attractive investment for 
private sector players at the early stage of industrial development. It is usually the case that the 
Government intervenes to set up the system to support early stage development of industries and 
gradually moves to higher-end services and regulatory roles once there is sufficient demand from 
industries and the basic infrastructure has been put in place. The other alternative to explore is for 
Ethiopia to use regional NQIs services. While it will be wise to leverage existing infrastructure in the 
region, particularly for sophisticated and capital intensive investments, such kind of arrangements will 
compromise export competitiveness (with regard to both cost and time) for frequently used services 
and where traceability of products matters for export. In the current global market, traceability of 
products from end to end is mandatory for exports and it is not practical and effective to outsource the 
quality and standards services for the whole value chain, if Ethiopia is to be competitive in the global 
markets. 
43. 
Another alternative for the project design considered was to address the need for fostering 
the private sector’s demand for quality assurance services through financial instruments; such as 
subsidized loans or matching grants scheme. The main reason for not introducing financial instruments 
for the project is due to complementarity with other projects (Ethiopia Competitiveness and Job 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia: National Quality Infrastructure Development Project (P160279) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15  
     
 
Creation Project and Ethiopia SME Finance Project), which have financial interventions to support 
domestic industries for improvement of their products and production systems. In addition, there are 
other donor programs (EU and the U.K. Department for International Development) who are engaged in 
strengthening the domestic private sector and have some kind of financial support mechanism in their 
projects. It is therefore the team’s assessment that financial resources are available to support SMEs, 
particularly, but what is lacking is the awareness, knowledge, and understanding of the role of quality 
assurance in competitiveness and growth.

A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
44. 
The MoST will be responsible for the implementation of the project. The PIU will be set up 
within the MoST. The responsibility of MoST is to implement its mandate as the oversight body for NQI 
development, overseeing the activities of the four NQI institutions and serving as a main coordination 
body for all key players in the NQI system. To achieve this, the MoST has established an NQI directorate, 
which is led by a Director and is a dedicated department to implement the MoST’s mandates related to 
NQI development. The project will support the full operationalization of this NQI directorate. In addition 
to the establishment of the PIU, the project will recruit the necessary experts for this directorate to 
ensure sustainability of the project interventions and effective development of the NQI agenda in the 
country. This arrangement is expected to ensure sustainability of the project results and its 
interventions after the project closure. While the PIU will be hosted within this directorate, the PIU’s 
project coordinator will directly report to the State Minister, who is responsible for this NQI directorate. 
45. 
To ensure smooth implementation and coordination, a Project Implementation Committee 
(PIC) will be established, which is composed of representatives from the implementing agencies, 
including ESA, ENAO, NMIE, ECAE, and MoST, with the PIU serving as the chair. The PIC will meet 
regularly (at least monthly) to review progress on the implementation of the agreed work plan, address 
any challenges, and take up to the ministry any issues that may need high-level support or intervention. 
The PIU’s project coordinator will also actively participate and serve within the NQITC and the NQI 
Forum, which covers broader stakeholders including the MoANR, Ministry of Health, Ministry of 
Livestock and Fisheries, and MoI, to ensure alignment and coordination of the project interventions with 
the national NQI development agenda. 
46. 
The implementation arrangements under the proposed project will be governed by the 
guidelines and procedures set out in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The PIM includes 
operational procedures, FM, procurement methods and procedures, safeguards, and M&E of the project 
and procedures for overall project management. The PIU will be responsible for the implementation of 
all project components by working with the NQI institutions, private sector players, and regulatory 
agencies.  
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation 
47. 
The project includes a robust M&E framework to enable decision makers to track 
performance, adjust implementation as needed, and demonstrate the impact of the interventions 
implemented. The PDO-level and intermediate results indicators and targets for the project are 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia: National Quality Infrastructure Development Project (P160279) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16  
     
 
specified in the results framework, which will serve as the basis for M&E of progress throughout 
implementation.  
48. 
The PIU will be responsible for providing—after receiving requisite information from project 
beneficiaries—quarterly  progress reports to the World Bank, which will include a section on progress 
in the achievement of project results. The M&E specialist within the PIU will have primary responsibility 
for establishing and managing the M&E system including data collection, compilation, and reporting. 
The M&E specialist will coordinate closely with the project coordinator on the monitoring and reporting 
of the PDO and other project indicators. The PIU, with the World Bank’s support, will also be responsible 
for analyzing results data, as part of the project’s communication strategy with key stakeholders on a 
periodic basis. Other staff of the PIU, MoST, and direct beneficiary entities will be trained in the project’s 
results framework as needed. The M&E system will be enhanced by supporting ICT solutions and 
infrastructure at the NQI institutions, which will strengthen the ministry’s and the beneficiary 
institutions’ monitoring mechanism that will help capture data and provide information on the overall 
performance of the NQI. 
C. Sustainability 
49. 
The potential sustainability of the project activities beyond its implementation is high given 
the strong level of the Government’s commitment. The GoE has established the basic framework for 
the NQI and allocates an annual budget for the NQI institutions as public service providers, except for 
ECAE, which is a publicly owned, revenue-generating enterprise. The GoE has identified the NQI as an 
important contributor for the achievement of its industrialization agenda. It has set up a dedicated 
oversight function responsible for the NQI development nationwide and has already set up the NQITC 
and the NQI Forum as the coordinating platforms to bring together all key stakeholders for the NQI. The 
Government has committed itself to a significant array of programs aimed at making the export sector 
more competitive in international markets. The impact of the project support provided to government 
agencies is expected to continue well beyond the life of the project, as it focuses on institutional and 
system building. In addition, the proposed project will also provide incentives for greater participation of 
the private sector and other relevant stakeholders during project implementation and after its closure 
through their continued involvement in the quality management process. 
50. 
NQI development is one of the key targets for the MoST, which is the implementing agency. 
The MoST has set ambitious targets in GTP II for NQI development due to the Government’s realization 
of the need to strengthen the quality system to reach its industrialization goal. The project will directly 
contribute to the achievement of the GTP II targets by supporting the implementation of the NQI policy 
and strategy and will strengthen the system to cope up with emerging and future demands from 
industries. As such, it is expected that the project will build on the existing foundation blocks for the NQI 
and that the Government will continue to expand and build on the results from the projects as the 
economy moves toward an industrialized economy.   
51. 
Furthermore, the project is anchored within the framework of the World Bank Group’s current 
engagements on the industrialization agenda to help the Government achieve its strategic objective of 
becoming ‘the light manufacturing hub of Africa’ by 2025. Together with a number of other ongoing 
and pipeline projects, the project will contribute to the GoE’s expected outcome of improved quality 
systems that contributes to the achievement of accelerated and sustained growth in a long term, 
notably: 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia: National Quality Infrastructure Development Project (P160279) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17  
     
 
 
The Competitiveness and Job Creation Project (US$250 million), which became effective in 
August 2014, supports the Industrial Parks Development Program. The GoE is developing 
industrial parks as a catalytic tool to generate investment, improve the business environment, 
facilitate linkages between foreign direct investment and SMEs, and advance the development 
of light manufacturing industries.  
 
The SME Finance Project (US$200 million), approved on May 17, 2016, aims to address the 
access to finance and business management skills constraints, particularly faced by SMEs that 
are hindering the growth and competitiveness of this specific target segment.  
 
The Investment Climate Advisory Program (US$10 million) is supporting the GoE to address key 
binding business constraints and is currently focusing on the streamlining and simplification of 
business licensing and registration, trade logistics, investment policy and promotion, and 
simplification of the tax administration system.  
 
As a follow-up of the work done on improving the trade logistics system, the World Bank Group 
is currently preparing the Trade Logistic Project (US$150 million) to support the improvement of 
the trade infrastructure with the aim of reducing trade logistics cost and transit time along the 
Ethio-Djibouti corridor.  
 
Furthermore, the World Bank Group currently provides TA on NQI Development, which supports 
the development of the NQI development strategy for the mid- and long-term in Ethiopia 
(2016–2021).  
 
In addition, this project will complement the planned interventions under the Agricultural 
Growth Project II which supports agricultural commercialization in selected value chains, and 
will specifically aim to coordinate the requirements of the MoANR as a regulatory agency for 
agro-processed exports, with the services provided by the NQI institutions supported by the 
project. It has been discussed and agreed that the MoANR will leverage on the testing 
laboratory services to be supported under this project and will primarily focus on the needs to 
perform its regulatory and monitoring role in the agriculture sector. All the regulatory ministries 
are expected to actively engage in the NQITC and benefit from the training and TA program 
financed under this project.  
 
The project will also contribute to the activities under the Ethiopia - Livestock Micro Reforms for 
Agribusiness, which seeks to increase the access of livestock smallholder producers and 
processors to improved services and inputs, thereby increasing production and reducing 
regulatory compliance costs in targeted subsectors.  
D. Role of Partners 
52. 
The project will liaise with development partners for coordination and collaboration to 
provide more comprehensive support to the Government. The collaboration partners include the EU 
Delegation, German Corporation for International Cooperation (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit, GIZ), the National Metrology Institute of Germany (Physikalisch-Technische 
Bundesanstalt, PTB), and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), given their 
past and current engagement in supporting the NQI in Ethiopia. GIZ, together with the PTB has been the