[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 53146 chars (24.1% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country and sector issues 
1. 
Country Background.  Ethiopia is the second most populous country in Africa (estimated 
around 80 million, of which approximately 12 million are pastoralists and 80 percent of the 
population live in rural areas), and has a decentralized government structure.  Having invested 
heavily in physical infrastructure and human resources over the past decade, the economy has 
achieved impressive growth (averaging 11.8 percent annually in the period of 2004-07).  Despite 
recent growth and an abundance of natural resources, it is one of the poorest countries in the 
world with per capita income of less than US$180 in 2007 and 39 percent of the population 
estimated to live below the poverty line in 2004/05.1  Ethiopia is ranked 169 out of 177 countries 
on the United Nations Development Program’s Human Development Index.  Under the highly 
centralized Derg regime (1975 to 1991), Ethiopia’s regional and woreda governments were 
marginalized.  After the fall of the Derg, the Government of Ethiopia (GOE) adopted 
decentralization as the cornerstone for building a multi-ethnic democratic country.  Combined 
with a commitment to fiscal decentralization, this signifies the Government’s intention to give 
local governments more direct and transparent control over public spending. 
2. 
Ethiopia’s Development Strategy.  Ethiopia is currently implementing its second poverty 
reduction strategy, known as the Plan for Accelerated and Sustained Development to End 
Poverty (PASDEP).  The PASDEP shows a strong vertical coordination of sectoral strategies 
with the overall government strategy and is well integrated with the budget through the 
Macroeconomic and Fiscal Framework (MEFF) and the government/donor Joint Budget and Aid 
Review (JBAR).  The PASDEP’s strategic vision is one of rapid and sustained growth primarily 
through scaled up development assistance and large domestic investments targeted at eliminating 
the poverty traps that have hindered the development of the country.  Strengthening human 
resource capacity and achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), of which 
education is a key element, is a cornerstone of the World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy 
(CAS)2 covering 2008-2011.  Several operations financed by IDA and other development 
partners (e.g., the Protection of Basic Services Project, Public Sector Capacity Development 
Project) also provide support in priority areas that will have significant benefits for the education 
sector.  
3. 
Ethiopia’s Education Sector.  In Ethiopia, primary education lasts 8 years and is split 
into grades 1-4 (primary first cycle) and grades 5-8 (primary second cycle).  Secondary 
education is also divided into two cycles, each with its own specific goals.  Grades 9-10 
(secondary first cycle) provide general secondary education and, upon completion, students are 
streamed either into grades 11-12 (secondary second cycle) as preparation for university, or into 
technical and vocational education and training (TVET), based on performance in the secondary 
education completion certificate examination.  General education comprises grades 1 to 12.  The 
provision of education is the concurrent responsibility of federal, regional and local 
                                                 
1 The Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MOFED) (2006).  The Plan for Accelerated and Sustained 
Development to End Poverty (PASDEP) (2006-2010). 
2 The CAS was presented to the Board in April 2008.  The CAS continues to consolidate support for PASDEP’s 
governance, growth and service delivery targets, and this project will directly support service delivery efforts.  
 
- 2 -
governments.  The Federal Government plays the dominant role in the provision of post-
secondary education, while also setting standards and providing overall policy guidance and 
monitoring and evaluation for the entire sector.  Regional governments are responsible for the 
oversight of the training of primary school teachers, for providing primary textbooks and for 
adapting the primary syllabus to local conditions.  Woreda (district) governments are responsible 
for paying and recruiting primary and secondary teachers, and for supervision and training of 
primary and secondary teachers.  
4. 
The Government prepared the national Education and Training Policy (ETP) in 1994, and 
within the framework of the ETP launched the first five year Education Sector Development 
Program (ESDP I) in 1997 as part of a twenty-year education sector plan.  As a result of a series 
of important organizational, financial and programmatic measures, the target set for ESDP I of 
raising primary enrollment from 3.7 million to 7 million was surpassed with enrollment reaching 
8.1 million in 2000/01 and 13.5 million in 2005/06, when ESDP III was launched.  Over this 
period, the gross enrollment rate (GER) increased from 61.6 to 91.3 percent and net enrollment 
from 52.2 to 77.5 percent.  Repetition rates dropped significantly from 15.7 percent and 18.6 
percent for boys and girls, respectively, in 1996/97, to 3.8 percent and 4.0 percent for boys and 
girls, respectively, in 2003/04.  First cycle secondary enrollment trends show significant 
increases (GER from 17.1 percent in 2001/02 to 33.2 percent in 2005/06) and although second 
cycle secondary enrollment is low (20,795 in 2005/06), it is increasing.  This has been a 
remarkable achievement and has occurred at the same time as a major expansion of both the 
TVET and higher education sub-sectors.   
5. 
Despite rapid expansion of the education system, Ethiopia’s education sector faces the 
following four key challenges.3  Access to education opportunities continues to be an obstacle, 
especially for females and other “most vulnerable children”4, poor students and pastoral areas 
(e.g., Somali and Afar).  Inequities in access to quality education are widespread, as better 
resourced schools are generally located in urban areas and in the non-emerging regions.  There 
are socio-cultural barriers to participation (especially for girls in rural areas) and there are 
financial constraints with households paying a large share of non-salary recurrent education 
expenditures.  
6. 
Achievements in access have not been accompanied by adequate improvements in 
quality.  In some areas, quality has deteriorated at least partly as a result of rapid expansion.  The 
2007 National Learning Assessment (NLA) in grades 4 and 8 show that student achievement is 
below the required levels and has declined during the period of expansion.  For example, the 
composite score for learning achievement in grade 4 shows a reduction from 48 percent in the 
1999/2000 baseline learning assessment to 41 percent in the 2007 NLA.  Similarly, the 
composite score for grade 8 shows a decline from 43 percent in 2000 to 40 percent in 2007.  Key 
factors identified in the 2007 NLA relating to low student learning outcomes include school 
organization and management; teacher training on new techniques; school supplies; availability 
of textbooks, curricular and instructional materials, and language of instruction (see Annex 1 for 
details).  However, completion rates at both grades 5 and 8 (used as a proxy indicator for quality) 
                                                 
3 World Bank (2005).  Education in Ethiopia: Strengthening the Foundation for Sustainable Progress.   
4 The most vulnerable children in Ethiopia are “rural & pastoralist children, orphans, children in remote locations, 
street children and drop outs”, as well as those with disabilities (see UNICEF 2008).  
 
- 3 -
have improved over the past three years (from 57 percent to 65 percent in grade 5 and from 34 
percent to 43 percent in grade 8).5 
7. 
The rapid expansion of the education system has left a considerable financing gap 
between available funds and the anticipated cost of investments needed to improve and 
maintain quality.  The indicative budget in the ESDP III is Birr 53 billion, but only Birr 37 
billion is provided for in PASDEP.6  Under the proposed GEQIP, the estimated funding 
requirement for quality improvement is over US$1 billion (or Birr 10 billion) over a period of 
five years.7  At the same time, a high proportion of the education recurrent budget for primary 
and secondary education is allocated to teacher salaries (over 90 percent).  In fact, the non-salary 
education budget at the woreda level has actually decreased from 1998 to 1999 EFY (JRM 
2006).  This has the effect of constraining the availability and predictability of resources for 
other inputs critical to support effective teaching and learning (e.g., training, textbooks and other 
materials, assessment, monitoring and evaluation systems, etc.) to enhance learning outcomes. 
8. 
The capacity to plan, manage and monitor is weak.  In Ethiopia, the management and 
financing of primary and secondary education is the responsibility of regions and woredas based 
on the national policy and standards developed and approved by the Ministry of Education 
(MOE).  However, some regional and woreda governments have weak capacity to gather and 
report on key performance indicators on time in order to manage and monitor effectively the 
implementation of education reforms.  The key issues related to policy making, management and 
monitoring capacity include: (i) weak institutional capacity for the delivery of general education, 
hampering implementation of a consistent and effective education policy; (ii) inadequate 
strategic planning and management capacity to support tasks such as policy development and 
medium to long term planning; and (iii) limited monitoring and evaluation systems making the 
reform process difficult to operationalize.  Compounding these capacity gaps is the constant 
turnover of key staff in the sector at different levels of the system, as well as insufficient 
numbers of qualified staff.8 
9. 
Government Strategy. The Government’s current vision for education development is 
described in the PASDEP, with the ESDP III serving as the overarching framework, giving high 
priority to quality improvement at all levels.  Within the framework of the ESDP III, the MOE 
has developed a draft General Education Quality Improvement Program9 (GEQIP).  A key 
recommendation of the education sector Annual Review Meeting (ARM) in 2007 was that MOE 
and Development Partners (DPs) work together to implement the GEQIP through a pooled 
funding mechanism.  The proposed Program will support the implementation of the first four of 
the six components of the GEQIP, namely: (i) Teacher Development Program (TDP) including 
English Language Quality Improvement Program (ELQIP); (ii) Curriculum, Textbooks and 
Assessment; (iii) Management and Administration Program (MAP) with an Education 
Management Information System (EMIS) sub-component; and (iv) School Improvement 
                                                 
5 2007 PASDEP Report. 
6 Ministry of Education (2006).  Five Year Education Sector Capacity Development Strategic Plan: Main Report.   
7 If the GEQIP is fully implemented, the anticipated fiscal shortfall is US$800 million based on the MOE’s 
preliminary cost estimates.   
8 UNESCO (IIEP)/UNICEF (expected 2008).  Capacity Building within the Education System in Ethiopia. 
9 The draft GEQIP is outlined in an Amharic document, which is a key companion document to the design of the 
proposed Program.  
 
- 4 -
Program (SIP) with a School Grants sub-component.10  Government has also prepared the 
preliminary cost estimates and financing plan of the proposed program, suggesting a funding gap 
of over US$800 million over the next five years.11 
10. 
Government’s Letter of Development Policy).  The Government prepared a letter of 
development policy, on the basis of the GEQIP program document, outlining the sector policy 
focusing on quality improvement in general education.  The letter reflects the views of both 
national and international partners and there is strong consensus around these policy areas.  
B. Rationale for Bank involvement 
11. 
There are three main rationales for Bank involvement.  First, the operation is consistent 
with the second strategic objective of the CAS covering the period 2008-2010, whose aim is 
“improving access to and quality of basic service delivery”.  The operation will support the 
Government’s GEQIP to improve the quality of education, together with the on-going Protection 
of Basic Services (PBS) Project, which provides block grants to regional and local governments 
to support the delivery of basic services, including general education.  The GEQIP will 
concentrate on quality reforms such as the new curriculum implementation, textbook 
development and provision, school grants to enhance school-based development reforms, as well 
as institutional development at the federal, regional and woreda levels.  On the other hand, the 
proposed Second PBS Project will continue to provide support through block grants, which are 
used mostly for recurrent expenditures for staff salaries, including salaries of primary and 
secondary school teachers.  The operation is also consistent with the objectives of the Africa 
Action Plan, which calls for investment in the achievement of MDGs, including education.  
Second, the Bank is well-placed to draw upon global experience and innovations in the design 
and implementation of education reform programs, including substantial experience in low 
income countries.  The learning experience will be beneficial for other low income countries, 
especially in Sub-Saharan Africa.  Third, the Bank’s financial and technical contribution is 
critical in leveraging other development partners’ financing, particularly the Fast Track Initiative 
Catalytic Fund (FTI CF).  Analysis of financing requirements for general quality improvement 
and currently confirmed commitments shows that Bank resources continue to be required to fill a 
substantial funding gap to achieve the objectives of the proposed program, although the 
Government still needs to mobilize additional resources for the program financing. 
C. Higher level objectives to which the project contributes 
12. 
At the international level, the project will contribute to the attainment of the education 
and gender related MDGs.  At the national level, the program will support the Government’s 
PASDEP, which recognizes the strategic importance of education within the context of poverty 
alleviation and economic growth.  The operation is also consistent with the objectives of the 
                                                 
10 The last two components of the GEQIP, not included in the current project, are Civics and Ethical Education and 
Information Communications Technology.   
11 Cost estimates are preliminary based on the draft national GEQIP and a costing exercise of basic inputs.  These 
estimates reflect the sum of proposed quality interventions and do not account for (a) the composition and 
sequencing of proposed expenditures; (b) possible effiency gains as a result of project interventions; and (c) fiscal 
impact of project interventions.  Cost estimates will be reviewed and updated as part of the planned Education 
Expenditure Review, financed by development partners, in partnership with the World Bank, during the first year of 
the GEQIP   
 
- 5 -
CAS, contributing to the Government’s objective to improve access to and quality of basic 
service delivery through the implementation of the GEQIP.

A. Lending instrument 
13. 
The proposed support from IDA will be provided within the framework and principles of 
a thematic Sector Wide-Approach (SWAp) through a pooled funding mechanism, focusing only 
on “quality improvement in general education”.  The proposed IDA instrument to support the 
GEQIP will be an Adaptable Program Loan (APL), implemented in two phases.  The first phase 
of the APL will be US$50 million equivalent, implemented over a period of four years (2009-
2013).  The expected date of effectiveness of the IDA Credit is January 31, 2009, and the 
Closing Date is July 7, 2013. 
14. 
The FTI CF will provide US$70 million in a grant channeled through the pool during the 
first three years of the program (see Annex 10 for CF Grant Approval Letter).12  The expected 
date of effectiveness of the FTI CF Grant Agreement is January 31, 2009, following the 
effectiveness of the IDA Credit.  It is expected that five development partners13 will be 
contributing approximately US$115 million during the first phase of the program.  Regions will 
allocate on average, at a minimum, 5 percent of recurrent expenditures towards non-salary, 
GEQIP-related inputs.  The federal government will gradually increase its contribution during 
the first phase of GEQIP, as a share of the total donor partner contributions to the pooled fund as 
follows: 5 percent (Year 1), 10 percent (Year 2), and 15 percent (Years 3 and 4) (see Annex 5).   
15. 
The Bank’s Project Appraisal Document (PAD) is regarded as a key reference document 
not only for the Bank’s APL Phase 1 financing, but also for the program as a whole, including 
the FTI CF grant and development partners joining the pooled funding mechanism.  
B. Program objectives and phases 
16. 
The overall objective of the proposed Program is to improve the quality of general 
education (Grades 1-12) throughout the country.   
17. 
The proposed APL will be implemented in two phases over a period of eight years.  The 
first phase of the APL will be implemented over a period of four years and the second phase will 
be implemented over a period of four years with additional funding expected from other donor 
partners.  The IDA contribution to Phase 1 of the APL is estimated at about US$50 million, and 
the estimated amount for Phase 2, if approved, is about US$80 million.  An overlapping APL, 
where the second phase could start prior to the completion of the first phase, has been agreed 
with Government.  If the Government completes the activities defined under the triggers for 
Phase 2, then Phase 2 can begin earlier.  The APL has been chosen as the most appropriate 
                                                 
12 The Government anticipates the second grant from the FTI CF in the amount of US$98 million in the spring of 
2009 and has included the anticipated funds in the cost and financing plan.  However, the FTI Secretariat has not 
confirmed the timing and amount of the second grant and indicated that Ethiopia is eligible to apply but the CF 
Committee will make the decision.  Approval is also subject to the performance of the initial allocation.  
13 The amount provided by each development partner is summarized in Annex 5. 
 
- 6 -
instrument, because the longer-term perspective of an APL would give the Government support 
to carry out a system-wide quality improvement reform, while providing the flexibility to adjust 
and refine interventions on an ongoing basis.  At the end of Phase 2, it is expected that the 
general education sub-sector will be better equipped to increase access to higher quality general 
education, and will have the capacity to make more efficient and effective use of its physical, 
financial and human resources to deliver quality education for all.  
18. 
The Bank’s assistance will be divided into two phases:14  
Phase 1:  Setting Standards and Foundations for Quality Improvement Reforms (2009-2013)   
19. 
The development objectives of the First Phase of the GEQIP (2009-2013) are to: (i) 
improve teaching and learning conditions in primary and secondary education and (ii) improve 
management, planning and budget capacity of the Ministry of Education and the Regional 
Education Bureaus.  The proposed interventions can be grouped in two broad categories: (a) 
quality improvement for general education through a curriculum reform and implementation for 
Grades 1-12 in all subjects, followed by the provision of textbooks compliant with the 
curriculum, new training programs for teacher educators and pre- and in-service teacher training 
and school grants to enhance community based management of schools and (b) capacity 
development to effectively plan, manage and monitor service delivery at the federal, regional, 
woreda and school levels, and with respect to education management information systems, 
especially at the federal and regional levels.  Given the extremely poor conditions of most 
primary and secondary schools, especially in more disadvantaged regions and rural areas, it is 
important to note that the first phase of the GEQIP will focus on setting standards and 
foundations for quality improvements, and provide “essential inputs” for improved teaching and 
learning conditions within the concept of the effective school model through a set of integrated 
basic inputs based on available resources available.   
Phase 2:  Expansion and Consolidation of Quality Improvement Reforms (2013-2017)  
20. 
Phase 2 (US$80 million from IDA), if approved, will have a duration of four years and 
scale up interventions and programs to have full coverage and scope, and consolidate and 
complete reforms for quality improvement in general education based on the lessons learned 
under the first phase.  During this phase, additional resources will be mobilized from both 
domestic and external resources to address any gap in financing to expand and consolidate 
quality improvement reforms launched under the first phase of the GEQIP.  At the end of Phase 
2, the following achievements are expected: (i) improved learning outcomes; (ii) improved 
completion rates in Grades 5 and 8; and (iii) improved Gross Enrollment Rate (GER) in the first 
and second cycles of secondary education.   
21. 
Compliance with some key performance indicators for Phase 1 would also function as 
“triggers” for consideration of the Second Phase of Bank support.  Table 1 below summarizes the 
list of triggers for moving from Phase 1 to Phase 2.   
                                                 
14 Pooled funding DPs also plan to provide support in two phases for the implementation of the GEQIP, but they 
have not yet confirmed their estimated contributions for the second phase. 
 
- 7 -
Table 1: Triggers for the Second Phase of the APL 
 
Components 
Triggers for Phase II 
(to be assessed before authorization of Phase II of APL 
Curriculum, Textbooks, 
Assessment 
Contracts are signed for the development, printing, and delivery to woredas of 
textbooks and teachers guides in Grade 1-8 in the four core subjects of 
mathematics, the mother tongue, English, and the sciences,15 following open and 
competitive selection from offers made by publishers. 
Teacher Development 
Program 
The pre-service teacher education strategy has been reviewed and revised, as 
appropriate, taking into account the findings of the impact and sustainability study 
of TDP2 implementation, conducted with Terms of Reference (TORs) satisfactory 
to IDA. 
School Improvement 
Program  
The Parent Teacher Associations (PTAs)/School Boards of 75 percent of primary 
and secondary schools are managing their own operational budgets consistent with 
the Bluebook Guidelines.   
Management and 
Administration Program 
Finalization of national and all regional ESDP IV plans.  
C. Project development objective and key indicators 
22. 
The overall purpose of the GEQIP is to improve the quality of general education (Grades 
1-12) throughout the country.  The Program will be monitored closely through a set of key 
performance indicators (see Annex 3).  The first phase of the GEQIP will also support the 
development of a robust monitoring and evaluation sub-component, and will assist the MOE in 
further improving the existing EMIS capacity.   
23. 
The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system of the program will rely on the 
Government’s M&E system, which provides key system performance data on a regular basis 
through its EMIS.  Baseline data for program outcomes in terms of learning outcomes are 
available based on the results of national-sample based student learning assessments of grades 4 
and 8.  Baseline data for several key performance indicators (e.g., percentage of teachers with 
qualifications) are available from the EMIS data.  Under Phase 1, indicators based on available 
data (including input-based indicators) will be used to provide the first quantitative evidence 
concerning program performance.  The first phase of the GEQIP will also support several 
monitoring and evaluation studies and the development of monitoring and evaluation capacity in 
the MOE (see Annex 3).  
D. Project components 
24. 
The proposed Phase 1 of the Project consists of the following components: (i) 
Curriculum, Textbooks and Assessment; (ii) Teacher Development Program (TDP), including 
English Language Quality Improvement Program (ELQIP); (iii) School Improvement Program 
(SIP), including school grants; (iv) Management and Administration Program (MAP), including 
EMIS; and (v) Program Coordination, including monitoring and evaluation activities.   
                                                 
15 The science subjects include environmental science (G1-4), integrated science (G5-6), and biology, chemistry, and 
physics (G7-8). 
 
- 8 -
25. 
GEQIP takes a holistic approach to improving the quality of general education by 
adapting the concept of the school effectiveness model (World Bank 2000).  The framework is 
particularly suitable for GEQIP given the politically and fiscally decentralized structure of the 
Ethiopian education system, paired with the Government’s recent efforts to implement a broad 
sector reform to improve the quality of education.  While GEQIP does not address all eight 
domains of the school effectiveness model, the components of the first phase Project are 
designed to align with ongoing sector activities supported by the Government and development 
partners.  The “value added” contribution of GEQIP, towards fulfilling the objective of 
improving the quality of general education, rests on the extent to which the components are 
implemented in coordination with other inputs.  GEQIP will contribute to the overall quality 
improvement of the Ethiopian education system by providing support for activities that 
complement inputs in other domains, such as teacher salaries and school construction, financed 
mostly through PBS and the government budget. 
26. 
The cross-component linkage is an important feature of GEQIP, which is designed to 
enhance coordination and synergy among components that have operated separately in the past.  
The newly revised curriculum will serve as a cross-cutting foundation for the first three 
components of the program.  The revised curriculum will guide the revision of the textbooks and 
teacher guides, as well as the teacher educator and pre- and in-service teacher training program 
curricula that will be developed under GEQIP.  The MAP also cuts across the other components 
since capacity building is needed within each project component. 
27. 
Each component includes a set of priority programs, is closely linked to the other 
components, and is implemented at different tiers of government.  As a result, each level of 
government may have some responsibility for the implementation of each component to achieve 
the project’s development objectives.  To achieve the overall objectives, the project requires: (i) 
a flexible approach in design so that resources are provided to MOE and implementing units at 
the national level and regions based on their work plans; and (ii) effective coordination not only 
among components/sub-components, but also among different levels of government and 
implementing units.  Therefore, the base costs under the components are indicative only, as 
allocation of budgets will be defined annually by federal, regional and institutional work plans. 
Component 1: Curriculum, Textbooks and Assessment  
(estimated base cost: US$146.7 million) 
28. 
The main objectives of this component are to: (a) implement a new school curriculum; 
(b) provide textbooks and teacher guides developed for the new curriculum; and (c) align student 
assessment and examinations with the new curriculum and reform the inspection system.  The 
component will consist of the following sub-components.   
29. 
Sub-component 1.1: Curriculum Reform and Implementation.  This sub-component 
will support the reform of the curriculum for Grades 1-12 to improve the quality of general 
education.  The project will support the following activities: (i) orientation programs about the 
new curriculum; (ii) development of a new strategy for teaching science and mathematics; (iii) 
alignment of the curriculum for the Alternative Basic Education (ABE) with the new revised 
general education curriculum; and (iv) monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the 
new curriculum. 
 
- 9 -
30. 
Sub-component 1.2: Teaching and Learning Materials.  In the context of available 
resources and capacity, priority will be given to the development and provision of textbooks and 
teacher guides for Grades 9-12 mathematics, biology, chemistry, and physics which national and 
international publishers can readily adapt from their market-tested series; provision of Grades 9-
12 textbooks and teacher guides in the other subjects; and provision of textbooks and teacher 
guides for Grades 1-8.  Where the required quantities are small, as for books for certain 
languages of instruction at the primary level, the project will seek alternative methods of 
provision, including negotiation with contracted publishers for translation and publication in 
those languages.  The acquisition of textbooks and teacher guides will be made using open and 
competitive procurement procedures and be delivered to MOE in designated woredas. 
31. 
Sub-component 1.3: Assessment and Examinations.  Under the first phase of the 
project, this sub-component will focus on detailed review and analyses to develop strategies for 
implementation during the second phase.  The analytical work would include identifying 
measures to strengthen the capacity of the MOE General Education Quality Assurance and 
Examination Agency (GEQAEA), including the Inspectorate Department, to ensure that national 
examinations and assessments are aligned with the newly developed curriculum.  The program 
may support the expansion of the NLA to include Grades 10 and 12.  The program may also 
support preliminary work on inspection system reforms, based on the results of the Inspection 
Reform Study to be conducted during Year 1 with GEQIP support. 
Component 2: Teacher Development Program (TDP)  
(estimated base cost: US$62.2 million) 
32. 
The component will support the Government’s efforts to increase the supply of effective 
teacher educators, teachers and facilitators in primary and secondary education through the 
implementation of teacher education, and in-service and pre-service teacher development 
programs.  MOE has gained some implementation experience under the previous Teacher 
Development Program (TDP1), financed through a pooled funding arrangement by a consortium 
of bilateral development partners.  TDP1 closed in June 2008.  Under GEQIP, MOE plans to 
continue to support teacher development activities, including improved targeting of access to 
primary teaching, enhanced practical teaching experience during teacher training, expanded in-
service professional development opportunities and training for the facilitators (or teachers) in 
the ABE Centers. 
33. 
Sub-component 2.1: Pre-Service Teacher Education Quality Improvement.  GEQIP 
will provide support to enhance the pre-service teacher training program for regular and ABE 
programs.  The teacher training program will focus on six elements: (i) improved selection of 
entrants to teacher training; (ii) provision of teaching materials in the teacher education 
institutions (TEIs); (iii) enhanced practicum for teacher candidates; (iv) in-service pedagogical 
training for teacher educators; (v) enhanced English language supports in the TEIs; and (vi) 
provision of a training program for ABE facilitators.  
34. 
Sub-component 2.2: In-Service Teacher Education Quality Improvement.  The in-
service teacher training sub-component includes revision of the following program areas: (i) 
enhancing the provision of continuous professional development at schools; (ii) providing 
English language training for teachers of English and developing a cadre of school-based English 
 
- 10 -
mentors who will support all teachers using English as a medium of instruction; (iii) developing 
a teacher career structure and licensing and re-licensing system which recognizes professional 
development and behavior; and (iv) upgrading primary teachers from a certificate qualification to 
a diploma qualification.  The Department of Education Programs and Teacher Education 
(EPTED) of the MOE will 

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

nd School Improvement Plan processes are 
properly implemented.  An ongoing monitoring process through the School Grants Utilization 
Survey, to be conducted every two years, will ensure that the instruments and training materials 
are updated regularly for appropriateness and effectiveness.   
37. 
Sub-component 3.2: School Grants.  The key issue facing the provision of school grants 
in Ethiopia is not related to difficulties in disbursement, financial management or 
accountability16; rather, it is the acute constraints on woreda budgets which result in a much 
lower overall level of disbursement across the country than is prescribed in the Bluebook.  The 
project will support the implementation efforts at the federal, regional and woreda levels, 
particularly with respect to establishing an effective system to monitor the flow of funds.  The 
school grants sub-component has been designed to address this constraint through the provision 
of a minimum amount of funds based on enrollment rates to all schools and ABE Centers.  The 
grant will be used to finance elements of the SIP.  To assist with implementation of the school 
grants sub-component, the draft School Grants Guidelines (SGGs) have been developed and 
expected to be finalized before Effectiveness.  These Guidelines provide guidance on all aspects 
of implementation at federal, regional, woreda and school/community levels and are cross 
referenced with the SIP guidelines.  The SGGs are consistent with Government’s Bluebook 
guidelines, but will be implemented as a stand-alone document to ensure that key responsibilities 
and outputs are understood at different levels. 
                                                 
16 With the exception of Oromiya, where disbursement has been a problem. 
 
- 11 -
Component 4:  Management and Administration Program (MAP)  
(estimated base cost: US$21.4 million) 
38. 
This component supports the Government’s initiatives to strengthen the planning, 
management, and monitoring capacity of MOE, REBs, and WEOs to implement system-wide 
primary and secondary education programs effectively and efficiently.  The following objectives 
will be addressed: (i) improve the effectiveness and efficiency of education planning, 
management, resource allocation and utilization through human capacity development; and 
strengthen the linkages between the woreda, regional and federal levels; (ii) design and 
implement a transparent, low-cost and productive system of management and administration; and 
(iii) strengthen the EMIS including improved collection and use of system data for planning, 
management, evaluation and policy making.  During the first phase of the GEQIP, this 
component will support capacity development for: (a) education sector planning and 
management; (b) school planning and management; and (c) EMIS at all levels.  During the first 
year, the predominant activity will be a detailed analytical and design work (i.e., MAP Design 
Study), followed by a more comprehensive implementation program from the second year.   
39. 
Sub-component 4.1: Capacity Development for Education Sector Planning and 
Management.  A key priority for this sub-component is to build capacity for federal and regional 
level strategic planning and budget analysis, and to strengthen systems for resource allocation 
and transfer.  This will include analysis of capital and recurrent expenditure needs, including 
salary and non-salary expenditures.  Gender budgeting in education has been identified as a 
particular planning priority (and MOFED has developed training materials in collaboration with 
the MOE).  The MAP Capacity Development Design Study (MAP Design Study) will be carried 
out under this sub-component.  No other activity will be implemented in Year 1 (though non-
pooled DPs will continue such support); other programs will be developed and implemented 
starting in Year 2, based on the results of the impact and needs assessment. 
40. 
Sub-component 4.2: Capacity Development for School Planning and Management.  
The objective of this sub-component is to contribute towards strengthening participatory school 
planning, management and monitoring for the purpose of greater effectiveness, efficiency and 
accountability in school performance, and improved teaching and learning.  An essential aspect 
of improving quality will be to improve performance through strengthening planning and 
management capacity at the point of service delivery, i.e. the school.  This sub-component has 
two major elements (i) SIP training and (ii) the Leadership and Management Program (LAMP), 
which was started under TDP1.  This sub-component will be closely coordinated with the SIP, 
including application of the specific planning and assessment tools to be developed under SIP.  
Additional programs will be developed and implemented from the second year, dependent on 
findings from the MAP Design Study. 
41. 
Sub-component 4.3: Education Management Information Systems (EMIS).  Under the 
first phase of the GEQIP, the MOE plans to strengthen the existing EMIS system through a 
combination of: (i) capacity development for policy analysis and planning; (ii) renewal, 
renovation, repair and ongoing maintenance of information technology (IT) infrastructure at the 
federal, regional and woreda levels; and (iii) several enhancement initiatives that will make 
education information more accessible and relevant.  This sub-component will support MOE and 
 
- 12 -
REBs to: (a) strengthen the existing education management information systems; and (b) build 
MOE capacity for policy analysis and planning to improve education provision.   
Component 5: Program Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation  
(estimated base cost: US$10.4 million) 
42. 
Effective implementation of the GEQIP will depend upon efficient coordination 
mechanisms, proper financial management and procurement practices, timely implementation, 
and effective monitoring and evaluation of project outcomes.  This component will provide the 
necessary resources for effective coordination and monitoring and evaluation, and the 
implementation of an information and communications strategy at the national and sub-national 
levels (see Annex 6).  There are two main sub-components:   
43. 
Sub-component 5.1: Program Coordination.  The GEQIP will be implemented at the 
federal, regional and woreda levels as well as at the participating public universities and teacher 
training institutions, responsible for pre-service and in-service teacher development programs, 
and coordinated by the MOE with the regional and woreda governments, and the participating 
institutions.  At the federal level, the Planning and Policy Analysis Department of the MOE will 
coordinate the implementation of the GEQIP, reporting directly to the State Minister for General 
Education, with inputs from relevant departments and institutions.  The technical support for 
implementation includes a team of short and long-term consultants, specializing in project 
implementation (including project management, financial management, procurement and M&E), 
resident in MOE, and providing regular support to regions.  MOE will play a key role in 
technical and procurement aspects of the project, whereas MOFED will be responsible for 
financial management aspects.  At the regional level, it was agreed that each region will have a 
similar institutional arrangements as the federal level, and the Planning Department of the REB 
in each region will coordinate the implementation of the regional GEQIP, reporting directly to 
the Head of the REB.  Funds would flow from MOFED to BOFED to WOFED as directed and 
then directly to the implementing institutions (i.e., CTEs, schools) while keeping the REBs 
informed about the transactions.   
44. 
Sub-component 5.2: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E).  This sub-component will 
support the establishment of a robust M&E system at the federal, regional and woreda levels to 
monitor and evaluate project outcomes and broader educational trends to provide feedback to 
improve performance.  The MOE will continue to update data to facilitate accurate reporting on 
the key progress indicators identified in the Results Framework as described in Annex 3.  Most 
of the data for monitoring project outcomes will come from existing mechanisms such as EMIS, 
or regular project reports, supplemented by project preparatory studies and a baseline survey 
undertaken prior to effectiveness.  A number of surveys are planned as part of the M&E strategy 
as follows: (i) baseline survey at the beginning of Year 1; (ii) School Grants Utilization Survey at 
the end of Years 1 and 3; (iii) mid-term review in the middle of Year 2; and (iv) exit survey at 
the end of Year 4 to assess impact of Phase 1 and to plan for Phase 2.  In addition, various policy 
and evaluation studies will be financed to address key issues (e.g., quality, financing, teacher 
effectiveness and utilization), as well as annual reviews and impact assessments under the 
supervision of the PPAD.  The M&E sub-component will include the development and 
implementation of a gender and equity needs assessment that covers all of the GEQIP 
 
- 13 -
components during Year 1.  Efforts will be made to connect education review processes with 
PBS review processes, including the JBARs.   
E. Lessons learned and reflected in the project design 
45. 
The project design takes into account lessons from previous IDA-financed projects in 
Ethiopia, including the Education Sector Development Project17 which closed in July 2004, and 
the Post-Secondary Education Project (PSEP) which has been under implementation since 2005, 
as well as similar projects elsewhere in the region.  The Education Sector Development Project 
was problematic at the outset as a result of overly ambitious project objectives and a complex 
design structure, even though the project was rated “marginally satisfactory”.  The PSEP is being 
implemented at the MOE and nine participating universities.  The project had limited 
improvement in implementation performance in 2008, but its implementation performance has 
been slow, due to: (i) weak project design which allocated a fixed amount of funding to each 
participating university irrespective of size, need and implementation capacity; and (ii) weak 
implementation capacity (including project coordination, procurement, financial management 
and M&E) and high staff turnover at MOE and universities, resulting in delays in the effective 
use of innovative grants.  Finally, the project takes into account lessons learned under the TDP1 
which closed in June 2008, and was financed by a group of bilateral donors over the past five 
years.18  In addition, the project design reflects lessons and findings from ongoing analytical and 
project preparation work in the areas of education expenditures, teacher education, institutional 
assessment, EMIS, and so forth.  Lessons have also been learned from non-education projects 
(e.g., PBS, PSCAP and PSNP).  
46. 
Key lessons learned and reflected in the project design include the following:  
• 
For education projects in decentralized systems, performance-based grants, 
together with capacity development support, are effective at bringing about 
institutional changes.  A combination of minimum conditions and performance 
measures has provided regional governments with strong incentives to improve key 
institutional performance areas like planning, budgeting, financial management and 
project implementation, but also with respect to good governance.  Performance of 
institutions will be monitored during Year 1 and performance-based grants may be 
included in GEQIP in Years 2 or 3.   
                                                 
17 The designs of the Education Sector Development Project and GEQIP show some similarities.  Both have national 
coverage and support interventions to improve the quality of primary and secondary education such as the provision 
of textbooks and teacher training.  Both are also complex operations, including a number of key areas of focus from 
infrastructure development to quality improvement.  Despite similarities, major differences exist between these two 
operations.  First, the Education Sector Development Project was an IDA-financed project, while GEQIP is a pooled 
funding operation, including funds from IDA, FTI and DPs, and use government procurement, financial 
management and M&E procedures to the extent possible.  Second, the Education Sector Development Project 
supported the development of the entire education sector from primary through tertiary education, but the GEQIP 
plans to support only general education through the provision of a set of integrated inputs to improve the quality of 
education for Grades 1-12.   
18 It is important to note that there was no comprehensive review of the TDP1 at the end of the project.  In the 
absence of such a review, the Midterm Report was used to identify lessons learned under the TDP. 
 
- 14 -
• 
Focus on schools through the provision of a coordinated set of key inputs in a 
coordinated manner to enhance the effectiveness of service delivery.  In Ethiopia, 
a decentralized service delivery system centered on schools and the communities they 
serve at the regional and woreda levels will be critical for effective service delivery.  
Delivery modalities for key activities such as teacher development and school 
improvement (including a school grants program) have already been established by 
the Government.  However, the Government also identified as a key lesson under the 
ESDP: the need to move from a “component-driven” modality to a more holistic and 
effectively decentralized planning and implementation process focused on schools 
and key areas of quality, access, monitoring and evaluation and capacity building.  
The design of the GEQIP is based on a holistic, integrated set of interventions 
(referred to as “the Package” by the Government).  
• 
Realistic assessment of institutional capacity and level of readiness before 
project effectiveness will increase the chances for success.  Lessons learned from 
TDP1 as well as PSEP indicate that the Government may have difficulty providing 
quarterly financial reports according to World Bank guidelines, which could possibly 
delay disbursement of the second tranche onwards.  In addition, TDP1 took some 
time to gain momentum. Thus some components under GEQIP are likely to 
experience delays in achieving full implementation unless sufficient incentives are 
introduced and adequate capacity development activities through technical assistance 
and training are provided.  Second, project effectiveness is considerably enhanced 
when there is strong leadership, political ownership and commitment to education 
reform at the national and sub-national levels.  Third, the amount allocated per region 
must be sufficient and focused to have a catalytic impact on the implementation of 
education sector plans.   
• 
Effective and efficient project delivery requires a jointly agreed results-based 
M&E system, including well-defined and measurable performance indicators, to be 
used effectively as a tool for monitoring progress during implementation.   
• 
Sustainability of project interventions will increase if country systems and 
procedures for procurement, financial management and M&E arrangements are 
used to the extent possible.  This requires the identification and introduction of well-
designed risk mitigating factors to avoid implementation delays under the program.  
Through the use of country systems, implementation procedures and reporting 
requirements are harmonized, transaction costs are minimized, and strong 
government ownership is ensured.  In addition, the sustainability of project 
interventions will be enhanced substantially as they will be integrated into the design 
of the government-led sector plans. 
• 
Program effectiveness is considerably enhanced when sustained technical 
assistance and training are available, especially in the context of low capacity in 
project implementation, procurement, financial management and M&E, as well as 
rapid turnover of staff.  
 
- 15 -
• 
Effectiveness of donor support is considerably enhanced when support is 
provided for the implementation of a comprehensive Government-led education 
plan.  Although the GEQIP is a first step towards a comprehensive approach using a 
pooled funding mechanism, Government and donors realize that the design and 
financing modality for the GEQIP program would need to go much further to align 
donor rules and procedures with government systems in order to increase government 
ownership and reduce transaction costs.  Consequently, Government and donors have 
agreed to design the GEQIP within the principles of a SWAp with several features: (i) 
pooling of resources by bilateral development partners, IDA and FTI CF, in addition 
to both federal and regional government resources; (ii) reliance on government rules 
and procedures for disbursing, monitoring and reporting program expenditures to the 
extent possible; (iii) development of a common and simplified monitoring framework 
for program outcomes aligned with existing government M&E systems; and (iv) 
focus only on quality aspects of the general education sub-sector.  In addition, GEQIP 
will build linkages with ongoing programs supported by non-pooled donors (e.g., 
USAID and UNICEF).   
F. Alternatives considered and reasons for rejection 
47. 
Development Policy Lending (DPL) and a Sector-Wide Approach (SWAp).  The 
possibility of using the Development Policy Lending instrument was considered but ultimately 
rejected by the Government.  The Government requested support from IDA, FTI CF, and 
bilateral development partners to support the implementation of the GEQIP through the 
provision of a set of related quality interventions as both federal and sub-national governments 
have not been able to allocate adequate resources during the expansion of general education.  
Key elements of the early design have been retained – providing “earmarked’ resources under 
the pooled funding arrangements based on the review of annual work plans prepared by the 
implementing units (e.g., MOE, REBs, universities and CTEs).  Institutional reforms regarding 
financial management, procurement and management and planning of service delivery are also 
integral to the performance criteria for the program.  
48. 
Integrating GEQIP with PBS.  The advantages of establishing GEQIP as part of PBS 
would be to ensure closer coordination and synergy with government planning, management, 
monitoring, and financing mechanisms (most of which are government processes).  This may 
include closer integration with PASDEP planning and monitoring processes and the JBAR 
process and would strengthen cooperation with MOFED.  However, the disadvantages are: (i) 
the possibility that several DPs will not fund GEQIP if it is a component of the PBS, and 
therefore the possibility of less funding; (ii) the possibility that GEQIP funding (as part of PBS) 
may be cut or suspended in the event of any ‘political’ issues between the donor community and 
the Government; (iii) the FTI CF grant could not be included in the PBS since it has been 
provided specifically for quality improvements in general education; and (iv) GEQIP funds are 
supposed to be earmarked for quality enhancement interventions in general education at all 
levels of government.  It would be operationally difficult to earmark funds for general education 
within PBS, as it provides “block grants” to regions and woredas.   
49. 
Pooling FTI CF and IDA Credit.  The Government and DPs agreed to use a pooled 
funding mechanism, including the then anticipated FTI CF Grant, during the preparation of the 
GEQIP Document.  This concept was also endorsed during the Project Concept Note (PCN)