[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 53780 chars (23.2% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

1. 
The proposed Ethiopia Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (REGREP) supports a remarkable 
transition from public sector led energy sector development to private sector driven expansion of solar 
and wind power in Ethiopia—representing what could be one of the largest independent power 
producer (IPP) programs in Sub-Saharan Africa. The proposed REGREP will mobilize IDA guarantees to 
backstop certain obligations of the Government for the country’s first set of competitively procured 
renewable energy (solar and wind) auctions to be developed as IPPs. The proposed REGREP will be the 
first instance of IDA Guarantees being deployed in Ethiopia and is well aligned with the World Bank’s 
corporate priorities on climate change and maximizing finance for development. Overall, the proposed 
REGREP could mobilize over US$1.5 billion in investment for at least 1,000 MW of renewable energy (solar 
and wind) IPPs in Ethiopia in the coming years (subject to the readiness of the IPPs as well as the guarantee 
coverage requested by each IPP). 
2. 
The REGREP is structured as a Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) for IDA Guarantees, 
with one front-runner solar IPP transaction (Metehara Solar IPP) supported in the first phase (REGREP 
Phase 1) and three future phases over a six-year period. Structuring the REGREP as an MPA responds to 
the Government’s need for long-term support to build a strong IPP program and track record of bankable 
transactions to attract credible private sector sponsors and financiers. First, the MPA allows for continuity 
and lessons learned to be incorporated into the process and investment framework. Second, the MPA 
signals a long-term Government commitment (backed by IDA Guarantees) to the private sector to develop 
IPPs in a transparent, affordable, and sustainable manner. Third, the MPA facilitates the implementation 
of the ongoing power sector reform program to maximize private sector financing through a longer-term, 
adaptive, and continuous engagement. Fourth, the MPA offers a more efficient and agile response to 
private sector investors, further improving the attractiveness of the investments. 
3. 
The program complements the ongoing Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness Programmatic 
Development Policy Operation (DPO) series (P168566) to sustain the Government of Ethiopia’s (GoE) 
ambitions and defined targets toward economic transformation, underpinned by reforms in the 
infrastructure sectors, including power. The power sector reform program under the DPO series 
encompasses (a) the legal and regulatory framework to attract private sector financing from IPPs; (b) tariff 
reforms aiming at achieving cost recovery in the medium term: under the approved multiyear tariff 
reform, the average effective tariff would increase to US$0.07 per kWh by 2021;1 (c) institutional reforms 
toward the unbundling of sector institutions and privatization of selected generation assets; (d) measures 
to improve the operational efficiency, service delivery, and customer service of the utilities; and (e) 
restructuring of the power sector utilities’ existing debt obligations. The first operation in the DPO series 
was approved in 2018, and preparation of the second operation, including for the measures on the power 
sector side, is well under way. 
4. 
The REGREP is designed as a World Bank Group engagement to harness world-class solar and 
wind resources in Ethiopia’s renewable energy led power system. The first phase includes one IPP, the 
Metehara solar IPP (supported by the United States Agency for International Development [USAID] for 
advisory services), with all relevant World Bank Group instruments available to the selected sponsor. The 
                                                          
1 Under the approved multi-year tariff framework, average tariff will increase from US$0.02 per kWh in 2018 to cost-recovery 
level of US$0.07 per kWh by 2021 in four annual increments. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia - Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (P162607) 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 104  
  
second phase of this MPA encompasses two IPPs developed under the World Bank Group’s Scaling Solar 
initiative, supported by International Finance Corporation (IFC) Advisory Services as transaction advisor 
and offers IDA guarantees, Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) political risk insurance, and 
IFC blended finance to potential investors. The GoE has requested continued IFC Transaction Advisory 
Support in the development of future solar IPPs. The technical work for site selection and pre-feasibility 
of wind IPPs, in collaboration with the Government of Denmark, is ongoing and will be considered in the 
third and fourth phases of this MPA. 
A. Country Context 
5. 
Ethiopia, a growing economy with a population of over 100 million located in the conflict-
affected Horn of Africa region, is experiencing an unprecedented political and economic change. A new 
Prime Minister came to power in April 2018, during one of Ethiopia’s worst political and social crises in 
decades, which had forced the Government to declare a state of emergency twice in three years. Since 
his appointment, the Prime Minister has signed a peace agreement with Eritrea and reopened the border 
following two decades of conflict. The new administration has opened new political space for dialogue, 
released political prisoners, lifted bans on political parties and media outlets, actively engaged in regional 
diplomacy, and announced a range of economic reforms designed to revitalize the Ethiopian economy by 
expanding the role of the private sector. Given Ethiopia’s size and location, this shift has transformed the 
economic and political landscape in the Horn of Africa and further afield. 
6. 
Over the past decade, Ethiopia has achieved substantial progress in promoting economic, social, 
and human development. For the last 10 years, the Ethiopian economy has grown at an annual rate of 
over 10 percent in real terms, making Ethiopia one of the world’s fastest-growing economies. This period 
of robust growth was driven by large-scale public investment in infrastructure and energy, which was 
made possible by favorable commodity prices and international debt-relief efforts in the mid-2000s. The 
poverty rate declined from 55.5 percent in 2000 to 26.7 percent in 2016,2 and Ethiopia made significant 
progress on the Millennium Development Goals. The primary enrollment rate quadrupled, child mortality 
rate halved, and the number of people with access to clean water more than doubled. Average life 
expectancy has increased by about one year annually since 2000 and is now higher than the averages for 
both Sub-Saharan Africa and low-income countries worldwide. 
7. 
Ethiopia has initiated reforms in key strategic sectors currently dominated by state-owned 
enterprises (SOEs), opening telecommunications, energy, aviation, and logistics to foreign participation. 
The implementation of these supported reforms can provide a significant impetus to the economy by 
strengthening the role of the private sector and moving toward a sustainable financing model for 
Ethiopia’s continued growth trajectory and create jobs for its young and growing population with 
approximately two million new entrants joining the labor market each year. 
8. 
The World Bank is supporting the Government’s economic reform program through a three-
year DPO series (FY19–FY21). The DPO series is the first World Bank budget support operation to Ethiopia 
in over a decade. It supports the acceleration of the Government’s economy-wide reform program by 
taking actions to open the private sector for competition and foreign participation, reform the SOE sector, 
and put the economy on a fiscally sustainable path. Reforms in the power sector are spearheading the 
                                                          
2 The poverty rate is measured at the international poverty line of US$1.9 per day in 2011 purchasing-power parity terms. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia - Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (P162607) 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 104  
  
overall economic transformation, with the objective of providing adequate and reliable power for new 
and existing domestic consumers and facilitating Ethiopia’s emergence as a regional energy hub. 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
9. 
Following a recent restructuring, Ethiopia’s power sector is operated by a power generation and 
transmission utility (Ethiopian Electric Power) and a distribution utility (Ethiopian Electric Utility). In 
2013, the original, vertically integrated utility, Ethiopian Electric Power Corporation (EEPCo), was 
unbundled into two public enterprises: (a) the Ethiopian Electric Power (EEP) company, responsible for 
the generation and transmission subsectors, and (b) the Ethiopian Electric Utility (EEU), responsible for 
power distribution and sales. The Ministry of Water, Irrigation, and Energy (MoWIE) continues to be 
responsible for coordination and oversight of the electricity sector. The GoE also established a regulatory 
agency (the Ethiopian Energy Authority), responsible for developing transparent and effective rules, 
directives, and standards to promote performance and investment in the sector (see reform program 
timeline in Figure 1). 
10. 
Ethiopia has vast and largely unharnessed clean energy resources. Today, Ethiopia is one of the 
few countries in the world which generates almost all of its electricity from renewable resources (96 
percent from hydropower and 4 percent from wind power). Furthermore, Ethiopia is endowed with 
significant unharnessed potential for further expansion of renewable energy supply—including solar 
power (5.5 kW/m2/day), 30,000 MW of hydropower, 10,000 MW of geothermal power, and 5,000 MW of 
wind power. Investments to exploit these resources and transition to a more diversified mix of renewable 
energy resources are in line with Ethiopia’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) under the Paris 
Agreement, one of the few NDCs worldwide that is considered compatible with less than 2°C warming. 
11. 
Ethiopia’s installed capacity has more than quadrupled since 2009, when it was last hit by a 
significant supply shortage that led to severe power outages. The available generation capacity, mostly 
based on hydropower, reached about 4,500 MW in early 2019—the second highest available generation 
capacity in Sub-Saharan Africa—up from around 1,100 MW in 2009. However, memories are still fresh of 
the last supply shortage in 2009—triggered by drought conditions and demand outpacing supply—when 
the utility was forced to resort to countrywide load shedding, lasting 16–18 hours every day, expensive 
rental power, and instructions to industry to shut down their operations for one month or to use their 
own diesel generation. 
12. 
Domestic electricity demand is expected to continue growing in double digits—growth since 
2010 has averaged 15 percent—driven by industrialization as well as a renewed focus on electrification, 
with a National Electrification Program (NEP) that aims to provide universal access to electricity by 2025. 
The GoE has prioritized the development of industrial parks and export-processing zones and has enacted 
policies to encourage Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and private investment in light manufacturing. This 
industrialization strategy of the GoE will further drive the demand for electricity in the domestic market. 
Further, in November 2017, Ethiopia, with support from the World Bank, launched its NEP to shift focus 
on delivery of adequate, reliable, and affordable electricity services and not just infrastructure 
development. At 33 percent on-grid electrification rate and 11 percent off-grid electrification rate, 
Ethiopia still has the second largest energy access deficit in Sub-Saharan Africa (after Nigeria), and the 
third in the world. Nearly 60 percent of the population still lives in the dark, and only 24 percent of primary 
schools and 30 percent of health centers have access to electricity services. An update to the NEP was 
launched in March 2019, laying out the implementation modalities for accelerating off-grid electrification 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia - Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (P162607) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 104  
  
programs which complement the ongoing grid densification programs. The NEP is expected to contribute 
to double-digit growth in energy demand in the coming years. In addition, Ethiopia’s annual energy 
consumption per capita (around 120 kWh) is still an order of magnitude smaller than that of countries 
such as India (806 kWh), Vietnam (1,411 kWh), and China (3,927 kWh). Economic growth leading to 
increasing per capita energy consumption would further require accelerated investment in energy 
infrastructure in the medium term. 
13. 
Recent investments in transmission interconnectors provide opportunities for Ethiopia’s power 
sector to become an integral part of the growing regional integration agenda in the Horn of Africa and 
the East Africa Power Pool (EAPP)3 countries. Recently completed and ongoing investments in power 
transmission interconnections to neighboring countries enable exports to, among others, Djibouti, Sudan, 
Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, and Rwanda already now or in the near future. While power trade in the EAPP 
region is based on bilateral agreements between countries, plans are underway for development of a 
trading platform which could enable more competitive power trade in the medium-term. In the long term, 
given its massive clean energy reserves, Ethiopia can become a cornerstone of the regional power trade 
in the EAPP, and even export into the Southern Africa Power Pool (SAPP). Ethiopia’s renewable energy 
potential will also be crucial in addressing the electricity access deficit in East Africa. Just the Horn of Africa 
subregion accounts for nearly 25 percent of the total electricity access deficit in Sub-Saharan Africa. Until 
the regional power pools develop spot markets, this regional power trade would rely on Ethiopia erecting 
the remaining power transmission interconnections and getting into bilateral agreements with 
neighboring countries. Based on the Government’s plans, by 2025, Ethiopia could export nearly 1,000 MW 
of power, generating over US$500 million in export revenue. The electricity sector can also become a 
major driver of the wider regional integration agenda. 
14. 
Least-cost generation expansion plans for Ethiopia foresee substantial additions of solar and 
wind to be commissioned by 2030 to meet up to around 10 percent of supply, as these sources 
contribute to meeting domestic and export demand at low cost, diversify sources of supply, and 
improve resilience to droughts and climate change. By 2025, the required power production could reach 
up to 40,000 GWh (up from about 14,000 GWh in 2018), of which, nearly 25,000 GWh is expected to be 
from the domestic market. A probabilistic analysis carried out by the World Bank concluded that it is 
optimal for Ethiopia to build as much as 4,071 MW of new solar and wind power capacity between 2019 
and 2030, providing about 10 percent of supply by the end of this period. This considers the (large) 
uncertainties around (a) the commissioning schedule of large hydro plants; (b) demand growth; (c) cost 
of solar and wind technologies; and (d) hydrology conditions. Even when ignoring the abovementioned 
uncertainties, the optimal generation mix by 2030 includes large amounts of wind and solar capacity. In 
fact, without the planned energy output made available from solar and wind capacity additions, there is 
a real risk of energy shortfalls in Ethiopia given the typically low load factor (due to the uncertainties 
mentioned above) of the entirely renewable energy power system. 
                                                          
3The EAPP was established in 2005 by seven Eastern Africa countries: Burundi, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, 
Kenya, Rwanda, and Sudan. The EAPP was adopted as a specialized institution to foster power system interconnectivity by the 
heads of states of the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa region. Tanzania, Libya, and Uganda have joined the EAPP 
in March 2010, February 2011, and December 2012, respectively. Several major interconnections are under development or 
construction (including the Ethiopia–Kenya line, financed by the World Bank), and there are concerted efforts by development 
partners (DPs) to strengthen the EAPP Secretariat’s leadership and strategic vision as well as develop adequate electricity trade 
regulatory framework and rules to support regional projects. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia - Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (P162607) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 104  
  
15. 
Ethiopia’s power sector is well positioned in the short-term to absorb significant amounts of 
variable renewable energy into the grid network. The threshold for variable renewable energy installed 
capacity is significantly higher for systems with large shares of hydropower with reservoirs, as is the case 
in Ethiopia. Technical assessments by the World Bank concluded that several hundred MW of wind and 
solar can be connected to Ethiopia’s network without the need for significant system reinforcements. 
Investments in network reinforcements and operational improvements, many of which are already 
planned or under way, will be needed to accommodate further investments. Continued revisions to the 
regulatory framework will also be necessary to enable efficient large-scale development of solar and wind; 
a detailed regulatory gap analysis for the power sector is currently under way. 
16. 
However, the power sector does not have the ability to continue self-financing its growth, as 
Ethiopia’s traditional model of public financing for new investments in the power sector combined with 
exceptionally low tariffs has compromised the financial health of the two newly formed utilities. 
Electricity tariffs have remained nominally constant over the past decade while the currency continued to 
depreciate against the U.S. dollar (average tariff before the current reform was initiated in December 
2018 was about US$0.02 per kWh and was among the lowest in Sub-Saharan Africa). While the sector can 
currently maintain a slim operating profit margin, sector revenues have not kept pace with rapidly rising 
financing costs. Overreliance on short-term loans, used to finance long-term assets (mostly hydro power), 
has created a cash flow problem, as there is no prospect of repayment from electricity tariffs. As a result, 
while any direct internationally held debt service obligations of the utilities are met on time, most of the 
domestically held debt is routinely rolled forward. 
17. 
In this context, the Government is moving from public generation investments to IPPs, enabled 
by the landmark Public Private Partnership (PPP) Proclamation. To provide an institutional framework 
for the development and procurement of PPPs across the economy, the GoE has adopted an ‘umbrella’ 
legislation. Under the new PPP framework, a dedicated PPP Directorate General (DG) has been established 
at the Ministry of Finance (MoF), which short-lists (based on clear selection criteria) and approves PPP 
transactions across all the sectors. The PPP DG coordinates with EEP’s IPP development unit for power 
sector transactions. The PPP DG has also prepared procedures for selecting and procuring such projects 
in a transparent and competitive procurement process based on auction-based bidding procedures, which 
has become the default methodology for procuring IPPs. 
18. 
The transition toward private financing for power sector infrastructure is important for 
Ethiopia’s macroeconomic outlook. The future financing modality of the power sector is fundamental to 
the country’s macro-fiscal stability. Public borrowing by the utilities over the past decade has created a 
growing debt service obligation. The two utilities’ total combined liabilities of approximately US$10 billion 
account for about 15 percent of gross domestic product (GDP). In view of Ethiopia’s debt distress level, 
which is considered “high”, a continuation of public financing at a rate of billions of dollars a year will not 
only worsen the power sector financials but has the potential to drag the country to financial contagion 
and debt distress. The shift from relying on domestic state-owned banks to FDI for power sector 
infrastructure financing therefore represents a policy choice synchronous with macro-fiscal stability. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia - Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (P162607) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 104  
  
Figure 1. Government’s Reform Program Timeline in the Power Sector 
 
Source: World Bank staff. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia - Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (P162607) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 104  
  
19. 
Encouraging private financing for power sector infrastructure development forms a core part of 
Ethiopia’s transformative power sector reform program, supported by the DPO series, alongside 
measures to achieve sector financial viability. The GoE has initiated a set of power sector reforms to put 
the sector on a path toward more accountability and efficiency, supported by the World Bank’s DPO series 
(FY18–20). In December 2018, the GoE implemented the first tariff reform of a multiyear reform trajectory 
that will bring the average tariff to US$0.07 per kWh by 2021 (with continued adjustments expected each 
year through 2021). Alongside, the GoE is preparing a comprehensive debt restructuring plan for the 
sector utilities that have accumulated liabilities of nearly US$10 billion. An overall Power Sector Reform 
Road Map (PSRR) is being put together which aims at creating a more creditworthy, competitive, and 
efficient power sector through a series of further unbundling and possible privatizations in the sector 
(from the current vertically integrated SOE-led model). The Government is also focusing on improving 
utility performance, reducing losses, and improving collections (transmission and distribution losses are 
around 23 percent). The reform program is already having a measurable impact—the World Bank’s 2018 
assessment of the Regulatory Indicators for Sustainable Energy (RISE), Ethiopia was the fastest-improving 
country in Sub-Saharan Africa.4 
20. 
The GoE has developed a pipeline of renewable energy IPP projects under the new PPP 
Proclamation5, including transactions developed under the largest Scaling Solar initiative so far. IFC is 
providing transaction and financial advisory services to develop up to 750 MW of solar IPPs, making 
Ethiopia the World Bank Group’s largest country under the Scaling Solar initiative. The Scaling Solar 
initiative offers a suite of IDA, IFC, and MIGA instruments under a standardized umbrella aimed at creating 
viable markets for grid-connected solar photovoltaic (PV) power plants. It is an open, competitive, and 
transparent approach that facilitates the rapid development of privately owned, utility-scale solar PV IPPs. 
Recently, IDA, IFC, and the Government of Denmark also started collaborating to prepare 500 MW of wind 
IPPs using a similar approach. 
21. 
The proposed REGREP MPA program will support this pipeline of renewable energy IPP projects 
as part of a sector-wide World Bank Group engagement in Ethiopia that is closely aligned with the 
support from other Development Partners (DPs). The REGREP MPA supported IPP pipeline is being 
prepared with the help of comprehensive policy advice and technical support from the World Bank Group 
and is a central part of the Joint Implementation Plan (JIP) between IDA, IFC, and MIGA (summarized in 
Figure 2). The World Bank Group’s support includes IDA’s multifaceted advisory assistance for policy 
enactment as well as legal and regulatory reform (PPP Proclamation as well as IPP procurement and 
commercial framework development), capacity development for the IPP Unit at EEP (including a new, 
dedicated training program for PPPs in the power sector), as well as continued technical assistance for 
utility reform and long-term financial sustainability of the sector. IDA supported projects are contributing 
to improvements across the energy sector value chain. Finally, the DPO series supports the GoE’s 
ambitious power sector reform program. 
                                                          
4 Rise.ESMAP.org 
5 There were two legacy IPP transactions (in the geothermal sector) which were directly negotiated and pre-date the PPP 
Proclamation. GoE and the sponsors of these two legacy IPP transactions are in discussion regarding satisfaction of conditions 
precedent for financial closure of these transactions. These transactions are not part of REGREP MPA. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia - Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (P162607) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 104  
  
Figure 2. Government Actions and World Bank Group Support for the Implementation of the Renewable Energy IPP Program 
 
Source: World Bank staff. 
Ongoing 
Implementation
Financial 
Structuring
Transaction 
Development
Power Sector 
Reform 
Program
•
Legal/Regulatory Reform
•
PPP Proclamation (Law)
•
PPP Directive (Regulation)
•
Institutional Roles and Responsibilities
•
PPP Board and Unit (at MoFEC)
•
IPP Unit (at EEP)
•
Transparency and Governance 
•
PPP/IPP Transaction Screening Tool
•
PPP/IPP Power Sector Guidelines 
•
Competitive Power Market Development
•
Roadmap to Power Sector Reform
•
Possible unbundling and Privatization
•
Financial Viability of Power Sector
•
Cost Reflective Tariff Framework
•
Utility Performance Improvement Plan
•
Debt Restructuring Plan
GoE Actions
WBG  Contributions
•
Legal/Regulatory Reform
•
IDA (PPIAF) technical assistance for 
preparation of PPP Law and Regulation
•
Institutional Roles and Responsibilities
•
IDA (ESMAP+PPIAF) capacity building 
for MoFEC PPP Unit
•
IDA Credit (IPF) technical assistance 
and capacity building for EEP IPP Unit 
•
Transparency and Governance 
•
IDA (PPIAF) technical assistance for 
preparation of PPP Screening Tool and 
Power Sector Guidelines
•
Competitive Power Market Development
•
IDA (ESMAP) technical assistance for 
development of Roadmap to Power 
Sector Reform Program 
•
IDA Credit (IPF) capacity building for 
the power sector regulator (EEA)
•
Financial Viability of Power Sector
•
IDA (ESMAP) technical assistance for 
tariff framework, performance 
improvement plan, and debt 
restructuring plan development.
•
IDA Credit (DPO, PforR, IPF) for power 
sector reform, improved financial 
performance, and service delivery
Maximizing Finance for Development
•
Renewable Energy Resource Development
•
IDA (ESMAP) technical assistance for 
national solar mapping
•
IDA (ESMAP + Denmark) technical 
assistance for national wind atlas and 
site-specific resource mapping
•
IDA Credit (IPF) for test drilling for 
proving geothermal resources in East 
African Rift Valley 
•
Site Selection and Preparation
•
IDA (GIF) technical assistance for site 
selection, geotechnical investigations, 
and E/S screening -national 
framework
•
Commercial Preparation
•
500 MW WBG Scaling Solar Initiative 
(IFC Advisory)
•
500 MW WBG Scaling Wind Initiative 
(Proposed IFC Advisory to be 
supported by GIF)
•
Transaction Tendering
•
500 MW WBG Scaling Solar Initiative 
(IFC Advisory)
•
500 MW WBG Scaling Wind Initiative 
(Proposed IFC Advisory to be 
supported by GIF)
•
Final Negotiation
•
IDA Credit (IPF)technical 
assistance for legal and 
financial advisory services 
•
Commercial Close
•
IDA Credit (IPF)for technical 
assistance for legal and 
financial advisory services 
•
Financial Close
•
IFC Debt/Equity Financing 
possible for IPPs
•
MIGA PRI possible for IPPs
•
Government Support Obligations
•
IDA Guaranteespossible for 
payment and loan 
securitization for front-runner 
IPP transactions 
•
Renewable Energy Resource Development
•
Solar
•
Wind 
•
Geothermal
•
Site Selection and Preparation
•
Criteria development
•
National framework for E/S
•
Commercial Preparation
•
Draft PPA and GSA 
•
Legal, tax, insurance reviews 
•
Localization of agreements
•
Transaction Tendering
•
Tender design
•
Preparation of bidding documents
•
Review and selection
•
Contract award procedures
•
Final Negotiation
•
Legal review of 
PPA/agreements
•
Commercial Close
•
Signing of PPA/agreements
•
Financial Close
•
Mobilization of private 
financing
•
Government Support Obligations
•
Credit Enhancement
•
Contingent Liability 
Management
•
Construction by IPP
•
Monitoring and supervision
•
Commercial Operations Date
•
Testing and commissioning
•
LTSA / O&M 
•
Load Dispatch Management
•
Variable Renewable Energy 
(VRE) Integration 
•
Regulatory Oversight
•
Monitoring and supervision
•
Construction by IPP
•
IDA Credit (IPF) technical assistance 
for improved monitoring and 
supervision capabilities of EEP
•
Commercial Operations Date
•
IDA Credit (IPF) technical assistance 
for improved grid management
•
Load Dispatch Management
•
IDA Credit (IPF) -with development 
partners -for new National Load 
Dispatch Center with SCADA and 
improved planning and automation 
capabilities
•
Regulatory Oversight
•
IDA Credit (IPF) technical assistance 
for improved monitoring and 
supervision capabilities of EEA
•
IDA / MIGA dispute resolution and 
arbitration mechanisms
Over 3,000+ GWh of new 
clean energy in Ethiopia
Upstream public financing 
of about $200-300 million 
Over $1.5+ billion in FDI 
expected
Over 1,000+ MW of Solar 
and Wind IPPs expected
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia - Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (P162607) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 104  
  
22. 
The proposed REGREP MPA will leverage private capital at an estimated rate of up to 1:4 and 
total investment at a rate of up to 1:8. The REGREP MPA program will provide guarantees with a face 
value of up to US$200 million. These guarantees are expected to leverage in the order of US$750 million 
in private financing (equity and commercial debt) and a total of US$1.5 billion in investment (see Section 
II for details). In line with the Maximizing Financing for Development (MFD) approach, the World Bank 
Group’s support to Ethiopia’s IPP program follows a sequenced approach under which financing and 
technical assistance for policy reforms have unlocked significant opportunities for private sector 
participation in the power sector. 
23. 
Renewable energy IPP projects developed with support from the proposed REGREP MPA 
program are projected to serve domestic demand (which is expected to be about four-fifths of total 
demand by 2030) and export demand (one-fifth). As is standard practice in markets that are not 
liberalized, the IPPs are expected to be developed under ‘take-or-pay’ contracts. Continued engagement 
by the World Bank with the GoE on system planning, including ongoing support to update the Power 
Sector Master Plan, will ensure that excess capacity will not be procured under such long-term contracts. 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
24. 
The proposed REGREP is aligned with the World Bank Group’s twin goals of eliminating extreme 
poverty and boosting shared prosperity, Ethiopia’s NDC under the Paris Agreement, Sustainable 
Development Goal 7, Sustainable Energy for All, and the World Bank’s Energy Sector Directions Paper 
(ESDP). The proposed REGREP will contribute to the GoE’s agenda of expanding electricity access and will 
thereby contribute to poverty reduction and shared prosperity. The REGREP MPA program will also form 
a central element of Ethiopia’s NDC under the Paris Agreement. It is also aligned with the World Bank’s 
ESDP, which calls for increased focus to expand renewable energy by creating an enabling environment, 
promoting market solutions and increasing leverage of financial resources. 
25. 
The proposed REGREP is fully aligned with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership 
Framework for FY18—FY22 (Report No. 115135-ET) and the new Africa Regional Strategy. The proposed 
MPA will support Focus Area 1 (Fostering Structural Transformation for Growth) by enhancing private 
sector financing of infrastructure projects and Focus Area 2 (Building resilience and inclusiveness), by 
contributing to increasing supply of electricity in a sustainable manner and managing the impact of climate 
change through diversification of sources of energy supply. Under the new Africa Regional Strategy, the 
proposed MPA will contribute to (a) Pillar 1 (Create Sustainable and Inclusive Growth), specifically the 
MFD agenda and the target to raise foreign direct investment from 1.5 percent to 4 percent of GDP by 
2023, and (b) Pillar 3 (Build Resilience), specifically the climate change agenda and the target to raise 
renewable energy generation capacity in Sub-Saharan Africa from 28 GW to 38 GW by 2023. 
26. 
The proposed REGREP, together with the World Bank supported upstream policy reforms, will 
help maximize financing for the development of the power sector in Ethiopia. In line with the MFD 
approach, the support of the World Bank followed a sequenced approach under which financing and 
technical assistance for policy reforms unlocked opportunities for private sector participation in the power 
sector. The entirety of the World Bank Group’s support to the Government’s renewable IPP program is 
summarized in Figure 2. 
27. 
The renewable IPP program supported by the proposed REGREP can serve as a role model for 
infrastructure sector reform in Ethiopia as well as other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. The IPP 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia - Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (P162607) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 104  
  
program 

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

gh its size, vision, and programmatic 
nature, the REGREP MPA program of guarantees—the first IDA guarantee operation in Ethiopia—will send 
a strong signal about the Government’s seriousness for private sector participation in infrastructure and 
will provide lessons which can be replicated across sectors. Once such reputation and track record are 
established, the need for guarantees will be limited and can be deployed only in specific cases. 
30. 
Third, the MPA will facilitate the implementation of the power sector reform program to 
maximize private sector financing through a longer-term, adaptive, and continuous engagement. The 
MPA places emphasis on the achievement of a longer-term vision and provides assurance to the Client to 
commit to a higher level of ambition from the outset. The MPA will help sustain a commitment to the 
GoE’s reform agenda. Given the long list of IPP transactions that are being considered for guarantee 
support, the MPA is the optimal mechanism for channeling World Bank support to the IPP program. The 
World Bank’s long-term commitment through this MPA will send a positive signal to investors building 
their confidence over the medium to long term, rather than for a single transaction. 
31. 
Fourth, the MPA offers a more efficient and agile response to private sector investors, further 
improving the attractiveness of the investment environment.6 The MPA instrument responds in part to 
the lack of a streamlined process for a series of power sector transactions involving the private sector. 
The MPA aims to offer a clearly understood procedure for approving subsequent phases for cases such as 
these, with streamlined documentation and approval, allowing a much more efficient and agile solution 
for approval and documentation. 
                                                          
6 The World Bank, Multiphase Programmatic Approach; Operations Policy and Country Services Board Paper; July 2017 (page 16). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia - Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (P162607) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 104  
  
(ii) Program Results Chain 
Figure 3. Results Chain of the Proposed REGREP MPA 
 
Source: World Bank staff 
(iii) Program Development Objective Statement for the REGREP MPA Program 
32. 
The Program Development Objective (PrDO) is to ‘increase renewable energy generation capacity 
through private sector participation in Ethiopia’. 
(iv) Key PrDO Indicators with Baselines and End Targets 
(a) Increased renewable energy generation capacity under the IPP program that has reached 
commercial operation, from 0 MW in 2018 to at least 1,000 MW by 2025 
(b) Amount of private capital mobilized under the IPP program, from US$0 million in 2018 to at 
least US$800 million by 20257 
                                                          
7 Development Financial Institution (DFI) financing, such as IFC, does not count as private capital mobilized under the World Bank 
Group’s MFD framework. Private capital would include private equity and purely commercial financing, including commercial 
financing benefiting from an IDA guarantee. 
 
Execution of renewable energy IPP transactions with credit enhancement 
Increase renewable energy generation capacity through private sector participation 
in Ethiopia
PrDO
Beneficiaries and 
PDO-Level 
Indicators
Activities and 
Outputs
Private capital 
mobilized from 
IPP investors
Improved service delivery, including 
electricity access, and lower cost-
recovery tariffs
Higher-level 
objectives
Renewable energy capacity 
increased through construction 
of new utility-scale IPP plants in 
Ethiopia
Payment guarantees to 
secure PPA payment to 
IPPs
Loan guarantees to 
secure debt repayment by 
IPPs
Transaction advisory and 
programmatic technical 
assistance
Security of energy supply and resilience 
to climate change
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia - Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (P162607) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 104  
  
(c) 
Share of private capital (equity and debt) deployed in new IPPs, from 25 percent (2019) to 
65 percent by 20258 
(v) Program Framework 
33. 
The proposed REGREP MPA would provide up to US$200 million (the MPA envelope) of 
payment guarantees to cover EEP’s Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) payment obligations and loan 
guarantees for commercial lenders to support Ethiopia’s strong pipeline of IPP transactions. The REGREP 
MPA will be structured as a guarantees program applying the MPA, with a first phase of one transaction 
being submitted to the Board jointly with the overall program. 
34. 
The proposed REGREP MPA would support IPP transactions in four phases (see Table 1). The 
total number of projects that can be supported under the MPA depends on the guarantee coverage 
requested by each IPP. The indicative structure and guarantee allocation are summarized below: 
• 
Phase 1 would support the most advanced solar IPP transaction, the Metehara Solar IPP (100 MW) 
and is being submitted for approval together with the REGREP MPA program in FY2019. Phase 1 
is expected to include a payment guarantee with an estimated amount of US$10 million. The first 
IPPs are likely to finance themselves with private equity financing and Development Finance 
Institution (DFI) debt financing. The mix of financing sources will evolve as risks decline and total 
financing needs increase. Future transactions are therefore likely to attract private financing in 
both equity and debt. 
• 
Phase 2 would support two solar IPP transactions at Dicheto and Gad (250 MW in total) developed 
under the Scaling Solar Initiative, for which the Request for Proposal (RfP) has already been issued 
to the shortlisted bidders in April 2019. The estimated approval is in FY2020. Similar to Phase 1, 
the developers are expected to request only payment guarantees. The estimated guarantee 
amount is up to US$25 million. 
• 
Phase 3 will support an estimated 450 MW of solar IPPs and 100 MW of wind IPPs, with an 
estimated approval in FY2021 or FY2022. The Request for Qualification (RfQ) for the solar IPPs 
was issued in April 2019. Phase 3 may include loan guarantees for commercial debt in addition to 
payment guarantees, with an expected total amount of up to US$ 90 million. 
• 
Phase 4 could support an estimated 250 MW of solar IPPs and 200 MW of wind IPPs, with an 
estimated approval in FY2023 or FY2024. Similar to Phase 3, Phase 4 may include loan guarantees 
for commercial debt in addition to payment guarantees, with an expected total guarantee amount 
of up to US$ 75 million. 
35. 
To participate in a future phase of the program, transactions will have to meet the following 
requirements: 
(a) The feasibility studies have been completed. 
(b) The environmental and social safeguards documents have been completed. 
(c) 
The financing for implementing the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been secured (if 
applicable). 
                                                          
8 See previous footnote for the definition of private capital. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia - Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (P162607) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 104  
  
(d) The transaction has been prioritized and approved by the PPP Board and the tendering 
process has followed Ethiopia’s PPP framework and guidelines (see Institutional and 
Implementation Arrangements for details). 
(e) The winning bidder has been identified. 
36. 
The estimated duration of each Phase is about two to three years, spanning from approval 
(between bid award and financial close) to the commissioning of the IPP project. The exact duration 
may vary due to time taken to reach financial close and differences in construction times but are expected 
to stay within the two to three-year range. The closing date of the MPA would be aligned with the 
commissioning of the last plant, expected no later than December 2025. 
37. 
Each guarantee would become effective upon financial closure of the IPP, while the lifetime of 
the guarantees will depend on the type and form of the coverage. 
Table 1. MPA Program Framework and Indicative Structure of Phases 
PrDO/PDOs: Increase renewable energy generation capacity through private sector 
participation in Ethiopia. 
Phase 
# 
Sequential or 
Simultaneous 
Scope 
Estimated 
Guarantee 
Amount 
(US$, millions) 
Estimated 
Approval 
Year 
Environmental 
Assessment Category 
/ Estimated 
Environmental and 
Social Framework 
(ESF) Risk Level9 
1 
Simultaneous / 
overlapping phases 
(guarantee lifetime of 
20 years) 
Metehara 
Solar 
IPP 
(100 MW) 
10 
FY19 
B 
2 
Dicheto and Gad Solar 
IPPs (250 MW) 
Up to 25 
FY20 
B / Moderate risk 
3 
Estimated to include 
450 MW of solar and 
100 MW of wind 
Up to 90 
FY21/22 
B / Moderate risk 
4 
Estimated to include 
250 MW of solar and 
200 MW of wind 
Up to 75 
FY23/24 
B / Moderate risk 
Estimated total for the MPA 
program 
At least 1,000 MW, up 
to 1,350 MW 
Up to 200 
 
 
38. 
The initial phases will apply standard allocation of risks between the Government and the 
private IPP developers, in line with best practice at this stage of the power market development. The 
GoE is using PPAs and Government Support Agreements (GSAs) for the Metehara and Scaling Solar IPPs 
that are in line with international best practice for power markets that are not yet liberalized. Under this 
standard risk allocation, the IPP assumes the resource risk and commercial risks such as construction, 
financing, and proper operations and maintenance of the plant, while the Government assumes the 
demand risk, price risk and currency risk. 
                                                          
9 The safeguards aspects of each phase of the proposed REGREP will be assessed independently. In case future transactions are 
screened at substantial/high risk under the Environmental and Social Framework or Category A under the World Bank 
Performance Standards, the approval will be sought at the World Bank Board of Executive Directors. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia - Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (P162607) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 104  
  
39. 
The first three transactions supported under Phases 1 and 2 of the MPA—Metehara, Dicheto 
and Gad—are likely to attract private equity financing and DFI debt, with commercial debt likely to 
become part of the financing mix in later phases of the MPA. Market sounding during the preparation of 
the REGREP MPA suggests that the first solar IPPs in Ethiopia are likely to attract private equity financing 
and DFI debt financing. Lenders’ appetite to provide commercial debt to solar and wind IPPs in Ethiopia is 
expected to increase as the country builds a track record of successful IPP transactions. 
40. 
The exact form and allocation of the guarantee support for future transactions would be 
determined during appraisal of each MPA phase, as investor risk perception and the requested 
guarantee coverage are expected to evolve over the course of the MPA. The solar IPPs being considered 
for World Bank guarantee support are also the first competitively procured IPPs in Ethiopia and therefore 
likely need a higher level of payment guarantee coverage to build investor confidence. Loan guarantees, 
on the other hand, are unlikely to be required for the first two phases as all debt financing is expected to 
come from DFIs. Over time, if EEP successfully performs its role as an off-taker for the first IPPs, investor 
risk perception of the country may decrease, and accordingly the need for payment guarantee support 
for new IPPs. However, the need for loan guarantees may increase as DFI debt is complemented by 
commercial debt. As a structuring principle, the World Bank only needs to cover the minimum required 
to make the IPPs bankable. The World Bank will also work actively with the Government under this 
program to crowd in private commercial capital (including local currency financing) while ensuring that 
such solutions remain affordable and sustainable for Ethiopia’s energy sector. 
41. 
Several of the proposed transactions will be developed under the Scaling Solar Initiative, but 
participation in the World Bank Group’s Scaling Solar initiative is not a prerequisite to qualify for 
REGREP. Scaling Solar, which is currently developing over 1,000 MW of solar power in Sub-Saharan Africa 
(see Table 2), brings together a suite of IDA, IFC, and MIGA services and instruments under a single 
engagement aimed at creating viable markets for grid-connected solar PV power plants. It is an open, 
competitive, and transparent approach that facilitates the rapid development of privately owned, utility-
scale solar PV IPPs in Sub-Saharan Africa and other parts of the world. As part of the Scaling Solar initiative, 
IFC Advisory Services supports governments in preparing a competitive and transparent solar auction 
based on template documents and processes. Based on the bid package, IFC Investment Services, 
IDA/IBRD, and MIGA then provide term sheets for financing, guarantees, and political risk insurance, 
respectively. Bidders can decide to use none, a combination, or all of these World Bank Group 
instruments. Scaling Solar is currently active in Zambia, Senegal, Madagascar, and Ethiopia in Sub-Saharan 
Africa. 
Table 2. Scaling Solar Operations Status 
Country 
Round—Size 
Status 
Zambia 
Round 1—up to 100 MW 
Two projects awarded in 2016: 47.5 MW to Neoen-First Solar at 
US$0.06 per kWh (the lowest tariff for solar energy in Sub-Saharan 
Africa then) and 28.2 MW to Enel Green Power (EGP) at US$0.078 
per kWh. Both are under construction. 
Senegal 
Round 1—60 MW 
Awarded in 2018 to Engie-Meridiam at €0.038 per kWh for the 
Kahone plant and €0.04 per kWh for the Touba plant (about 
US$0.05 per kWh). Financial close is ongoing. This will be Senegal’s 
cheapest utility energy source. 
Madagascar 
Round 1—25 MW with 
RFQ completed; RFP under preparation 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia - Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (P162607) 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 104  
  
Country 
Round—Size 
Status 
storage 
Ethiopia 
Round 1—250 MW 
Round 2—500 MW 
RFQ completed; RFP issued in April 2019. 
RFQ issued in April 2019. 
Zambia 
Round 2—300 MW 
Round 3—200 MW 
RFQ completed; RFP under preparation 
Preparation not started 
Total: 1,185+ MW 
Source: World Bank Group. 
 
(vi) Learning Agenda 
42. 
The learning agenda focuses on three main areas: 
(a) First, the GoE’s capacity and institutional setup to implement state-of-the-art solar and 
wind IPPs in the context of the transition and reform of Ethiopia’s power sector. Based on 
the lessons learned in each phase, the program will engage with the GoE in a joint learning 
agenda that includes (a) the gradual improvement of resource identification and candidate 
site selection, based on the experience with the technical, social and environmental 
assessments of each MPA Phase; (b) gradual refinement of the institutional process and 
development of implementation capacity and standard documents, which will also allow to 
refine and standardize implementation of the GoE’s PPP framework more broadly; and (c) 
support from the transaction advisors to help the GoE set up its own Integrity Due Diligence 
(IDD) process and the capacity to implement it. 
(b) Second, the adequate design of the transactions to reflect the market’s response to the 
risk profile of the country, the sector and the IPP transactions and to maximize the 
program’s ability to mobilize private capital and attract world-class developers. The initial 
risk allocation in the Metehara and Scaling Solar transactions is in line with standards in 
similar markets and with the original templates approved by WB, IFC, and MIGA including 
the private developers taking commercial risks such as construction, financing, and proper 
operations and maintenance of the plant. Jointly with the GoE, the program will regularly 
evaluate the market response to the tendering process and documents—including the risk 
allocation captured therein—and draw lessons for the choice of type and scope of IDA 
guarantees provided in concert with other WBG instruments to the IPPs. The evaluations 
will take the form of market soundings and be captured in short write-ups that are prepared 
for each phase. 
(c) 
Third, the integration of variable renewable energy into the transmission and distribution 
grid with minimal curtailment. EEP is relatively well positioned to absorb significant 
amounts of variable renewable energy into a grid network thanks to the large share of hydro 
in the generation mix (96 percent in 2018) and has already gained experience with 
integrating two state-owned wind power plants (which provide the remaining 4 percent of 
the generation mix). However, further reinforcements and operational improvements will 
be needed after the first batches of solar and wind IPPs. Continued technical engagement 
by the World Bank and formal assessments for each MPA phase will evaluate the need for 
investments in network reinforcements, grid-scale storage investments, operational 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia - Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (P162607) 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 104  
  
improvements, and regulatory reforms. The findings from these assessments will feed into 
the technical assistance and capacity building engagement of the World Bank with the GoE. 
43. 
Lessons learned from each phase will be reflected in the gradual refinement of the IPP 
development and execution framework and the associated tendering and contract documents. The 
lessons will be reflected in the design of each subsequent transaction including the risk allocation and 
standard tendering and contract documents. Thereby, the REGREP MPA will also contribute to the 
learning agenda of the World Bank Group’s Scaling Solar initiative, as the Scaling Solar standard document 
templates and procurement framework were adapted to the context in Ethiopia. Documents and 
framework will continue to be refined over the course of the MPA, thus contributing to the global lessons 
learned under the Scaling Solar initiative.

A. Project Development Objective 
PDO Statement for the REGREP Phase 1 Project 
44. 
The PDO for REGREP Phase 1 is to increase renewable energy generation capacity through private 
sector participation in Ethiopia. 
PDO-Level Indicators 
45. 
Progress toward achieving the PDO will be measured by the following indicators: 
(a) Increased renewable energy generation capacity under the IPP program that has reached 
commercial operation from 0 MW in 2018 to 100 MW by 2022 
(b) Amount of private capital mobilized under the IPP program from US$0 million in 2018 to 
US$35 million by 202210 
B. Project Components 
46. 
The proposed REGREP Phase 1 consists of IDA guarantee support to the Metehara Solar IPP (100 
MW), which is the most advanced IPP transaction. The Metehara Solar IPP is expected to be operational 
by 2021. Under the IPP project, a consortium led by Enel Green Power (EGP) will be investing 
approximately US$120 million in the construction of the solar PV plant, with an estimated US$35 million 
of private capital mobilized. The power purchasing tariff, which has not yet been made public, is consistent 
with solar auction results observed in other SSA countries around the same time. The facility will generate 
approximately 280 GWh per year. This output will be sold under a 20-year PPA to EEP that covers all the 
energy generated by the plant. The IPP project’s location is in the Oromia region, almost 200 km east of 
the capital Addis Ababa, an area that enjoys high levels of solar radiation. The power plant will cover an 
area of 250 ha. 
                                                          
10 DFI financing, such as IFC, does not count as private capital mobilized under the MFD framework. Private capital would include 
private equity and purely commercial financing, including commercial financing benefiting from an IDA guarantee.