[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 62078 chars (11.4% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

Annex 3: Disbursement Linked Indicators, Disbursement Arrangements, and Verification 
Protocols .................................................................................................................................................... 63 
Annex 4: Summary Technical Assessment ............................................................................................. 81 
Annex 5: Summary Fiduciary Systems Assessment .............................................................................. 97 
 
Annex 6: Summary Environmental and Social Systems Assessment ................................................. 120 
Annex 7: Systematic Operations Risk Rating (SORT) ........................................................................ 127 
Annex 8: Program Action Plan .............................................................................................................. 131 
Annex 9: Implementation Support Plan ............................................................................................... 135 
Annex 10: Complementary Projects, Lessons Learned and Links with Current Operations ......... 137 
Annex 11: Description of Refugee Groups in Ethiopia ........................................................................ 142 
Annex 12: Map of Ethiopia Including Industrial Park and Refugee Camp Locations .................... 144 
 
i 
 
PAD DATA SHEET 
Ethiopia 
Economic Opportunities Program
PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
Africa 
Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation/Social Protection and Jobs Global Practices 
. 
Basic Information
Date: 
June 26, 2018 
Sectors: 
Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation, 
Social Protection and Labor
Country Director: 
Carolyn Turk 
Themes: 
Investment Climate, Jobs, Trade, Spatial  
Practice Manager 
Global Practice Vice 
President: 
Niraj Verma/Robert Chase
Jan Walliser 
 
Development and Skills 
Program ID: 
P163829 
Team Leader(s): 
Senidu Fanuel, Lucian 
Bucur Pop, Jade Ndiaye
 
 
Program Implementation 
Period: 
Expected Financing 
Effectiveness Date: 
Expected Financing 
Closing Date:  
Start Date: July 19, 2017 
 
July 31, 2018 
 
December 31, 
2024
End Date: June 30, 2024 
 
. 
Program Financing Data
[ ] 
Loan 
[ X ] Grant 
[ ] 
Other 
[ X] 
Credit 
 
 
For Loans/Credits/Others (US$, Million): 
Total Program Cost: 
 
333.6 
Total Bank Financing:
202
Total Cofinancing: 
 87.5 
Financing Gap:
0
. 
Financing Source 
Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
US$44.09 million
International Development Association (IDA) 
US$202 million 
 
Multi-donor Trust Fund 
US$87.5 million
Total 
US$333.6
. 
Borrower: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia 
Responsible Agency: Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation (MoFEC)
 Contact: 
Fisseha Abera 
Title: Director
ii 
 
 Telephone No.: 
+251 11 157 94 54 
Email: faberrak@gmail.com
Responsible Agency: Ethiopian Investment Commission 
 Contact: Dr. Belachew Mekuria Fikre 
Title: Commissioner 
 Telephone No.: 
+251 11 551 0033 
Email: Belachew.Mekuria@Ethio-invest.com
. 
Fiscal Year 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023
2024
2025
Annual 
60 
29.4 
41 
39.2
54.8
43.5
21.6
Cumulative 
60 
89.4 
130.4 
169.6
224.4
267.9
289.5
. 
Program Development Objective(s) 
To provide economic opportunities for Ethiopians and refugees in an environmentally and socially sustainable way 
 
. 
Compliance 
Policy 
Does the program depart from the CAS in content or in 
other significant respects? 
Yes [ ] 
No [ X ] 
 
Does the program require any waivers of Bank policies 
applicable to Program-for-Results operations? 
Yes [ ] 
No [ X ] 
Have these been approved by Bank management? 
Yes [ ]
No
[ ]
Is approval for any policy waiver sought from the Board?
Yes [ ]
No
[ X ]
Overall Risk Rating: High 
Legal Covenants 
Sections and Description  
Carry out the Program Action Plan, or cause the Program Action Plan to be carried out, in accordance with the schedule set 
out in the said Program Action Plan and in a manner satisfactory to the Association. Schedule 2 Section I.B.1(a) of the 
Financing Agreement.  
Sections and Description 
Three months from effective date, prepare, adopt and implement an Operations Manual, approved by the Association setting 
out detailed institutional, administrative, financial, technical and operational guidelines and procedures for the 
implementation of the Program. Schedule 2 Section I.C of the Financing Agreement.
Sections and Description 
One year from effective date, develop and commence implementation of a gender and protection action plan for vulnerable 
people (such as children and women), in accordance with terms of reference acceptable to the Association, including focus on 
discrimination, gender-based violence, related site-specific standard operating procedures, and establishment of a women 
friendly environment (such as, child care center, and a safe transportation plan for women working in industrial parks). 
Schedule 2 Section I.B.1(b) of the Financing Agreement
Conditions  
Type 
Description  
Effectiveness 
The Association is satisfied that Recipient has an adequate refugee protection framework. 
Article 5 of the Financing Agreement. 
Effectiveness  
The Recipient’s Refugees Proclamation has been passed by the House of Representatives, 
signed by the President and published in the Recipient’s Federal Negarit Gazette. Article 
5 of the Financing Agreement.
iii 
 
Effectiveness  
A Project Coordinating Unit has been established within EIC, with the following staff in 
place: a PIU Coordinator, Financial Management Specialist, and Procurement Specialist, 
all with qualifications, experience and terms of reference acceptable to the Association. 
Article 5 of the Financing Agreement.
Withdrawal 
For purposes of Section 2.03 of the Program General Conditions, for DLRs achieved 
prior to the Signature Date, except that withdrawals up to an aggregate amount not to 
exceed SDR 17,900,000 from the Grant and SDR 12,700,000 from the Credit may be 
made for such DLRs achieved prior to this date but on or after [July 19, 2017]. Schedule 
2, Section IV.B.1(a) of the Financing Agreement.
Withdrawal  
The Recipient may withdraw an amount not to exceed SDR 6,200,000 from the Grant and 
SDR 4,400,000 from the Credit subject to conditions in the agreement.  Schedule 2, 
Section IV.B.2.   
. 
Team Composition 
Bank Staff 
Name 
Title 
Specialization 
Unit 
Senidu Fanuel 
TTL  
Competitive industries, manufacturing, private sector 
development, SME development
GFCAE 
Lucian Bucur Pop 
TTL 
Social protection, labor 
GSP01 
Jade Ndiaye 
TTL 
Fragility, conflict and violence, private sector 
development, entrepreneurship
GFCAE 
John Speakman 
Advisor - Technical lead 
Refugees, industrial clusters, trade corridors
GFCME
Victoria Strokova 
Senior Economist 
Jobs, skills and labor productivity
GPSJB
Manju Haththotuwa  
Lead Private Sector Specialist  
Innovation, technology, entrepreneurship, 
competitive industries
GFCAE 
Qaiser Khan 
Lead Economist 
Safety nets and basic services
GSPO1
Sebnem Sahim 
Senior Economist 
Economic modeling
GEN03
Syed Estem Dadul 
Islam 
Senior Results Measurement 
Specialist 
Monitoring and evaluation  
CSECR 
Elsa Araya 
Senior Public Sector Specialist
Governance 
GG0AE
Tom Bundervoet 
Senior Economist  
Poverty and labor market 
GPV01 
Mamo Mihretu 
Senior Private Sector Specialist
Investment climate and investment promotion
GTCA1
Benjamin Herzberg 
Senior Private Sector Specialist 
Industrialization, Investment climate and investment 
promotion 
GFCMW 
Sherif Muhtaseb 
Senior Operations officer  
Sector-specific investment climate, economic zones, 
investment policy, investment facilitation
GFCIS 
Samuel Mulugeta 
Economist 
Expenditure framework analysis 
GSP01
Mengistu Achew 
Operations Officer 
Financial sector specialist
GFCAE
Abiy Demissie Belay Senior Financial Management 
Specialist 
Financial Management 
GG0AE 
Shimelis 
Woldehawariat 
Senior Procurement Specialist 
Procurement 
GGOPA 
Margaret Png 
Lead Counsel 
Legal
LEGAM
Emilie Suarez Santos Legal Analyst  
Legal
LEGAM
Maiada Mahmoud 
Abdel Fattah Kassem 
Finance Officer 
Disbursement  
WFALA 
iv 
 
Yalemzewud 
Simachew Tiruneh 
Social Safeguards Specialist  
Social Safeguards 
GSU07 
Simon Sottsas 
Senior Social Development 
Specialist 
Social Safeguards 
GSU07 
Yacob Wondimkun 
Endaylalu 
Environmental Safeguards 
Specialist 
Environmental Safeguards 
GEN01 
Non Bank Staff 
Name 
Title 
City
Helen Akanisi 
Consultant, Refugees 
Washington, D.C.
Nicola Palmer 
Consultant, Institutions/Governance
Washington, D.C.
Yehualashet Astera 
Consultant, Refugees 
Addis Ababa
Fantu Farris 
Consultant, Investment Climate 
Addis Ababa
Tilahun Kassahun  
Consultant, Investment Climate
Addis Ababa
1

A. Country Context  
1. 
Ethiopia is a landlocked country that has experienced impressive growth and gains in 
development in the past two decades. Gross domestic product (GDP) growth averaged more than 11 
percent per year, higher than the average for the region and exceeding that of other low-income countries. 
The Government’s accelerated, broad-based economic development plan paved the way for significant 
reductions in poverty—from 44 percent to 24 percent from 2000 to 2016—which has been accompanied 
by moderate improvements in access to education and health care.  
2. 
Despite accelerated progress, Ethiopia remains challenged by the need to create economic 
opportunities for its fast-growing population of over 100 million, including for an estimated 20 million 
Ethiopians living below the poverty line. GDP per capita was estimated at US$711 in 2016, with more 
than 70 percent of the population engaged in the agricultural sector. Demographic transition has presented 
opportunities and challenges for the country, with an increasingly urbanized, young working-age 
population. In 2013, 26.3 percent of urban youth was unemployed, compared to 21.7 percent of the urban 
working-age population in general. Although overall unemployment is low (5.2 percent), underemployment 
in Ethiopia is high (22 percent) and around one-fifth of wage workers earned below the poverty line in 
2013. Though regional differences in poverty appear to have converged, the Government recognizes that 
certain peripheral regions are lagging. The Developing Regional States constitute four regions (Afar, 
Benishangul-Gumuz, Gambella, and Somali Regional State) with acknowledged greater development needs 
relative to other Ethiopian regions. 
 
3. 
Set against this background, Ethiopia hosts more than 900,000 registered refugees and 
asylum seekers and is the second largest refugee-hosting country in Africa after Uganda. Ethiopia has 
had an open-door policy for refugees since its present government came to power in 1991, permitting 
refugees and asylum seekers the right to reside in Ethiopia in officially designated camps managed by the 
Administration for Refugee and Returnee Affairs (ARRA) with the support of the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian partners (see annex 12 for locations of major 
refugee camps). Most refugees are of Somali, Eritrean, Sudanese, and South Sudanese origin and live with 
limited socioeconomic rights, in some cases surviving entirely on humanitarian aid (box 1 provides basic 
demographic information on refugees). Three out of the four of the Developing Regional States are major 
refugee-hosting regions, putting pressure on already scare resources and services. The Government of 
Ethiopia (GoE) has recognized the difficulty of this situation, including the limitations of continuing 
humanitarian aid and has proposed measures to reduce idleness and aid dependency.  
Box 1. Refugees in Ethiopia 
Based on the latest UNHCR estimates (as of January 31, 2018) 901,236 registered refugees and asylum seekers 
from over nineteen countries reside in Ethiopia in periphery locations that are characterized by high levels of 
poverty, poor infrastructure and low human development. More than half of refugees are children and around 10 
percent are unaccompanied minors. In total there are 244,338 refugee households; violent conflict has left a large 
proportion of refugee households headed by women. The conflict in neighboring South Sudan has resulted in a 
large recent influx of refugees of South Sudanese origin (now constituting almost half of the refugee population), 
but many refugee groups have been living in Ethiopia for protracted periods in some cases for over 20 years. 
Overall the educational attainment of refugees is low: 41 percent of working-age refugees have no education, 42 
percent have primary and intermediate education, and 17 percent of refugees have secondary education and 
above. a There are large disparities between men and women, with women in general being significantly less 
educated. Nearly 54 percent of women refugees have no education at all, compared to 26 percent among men.  
Refugee groups of Somali, Eritrean, Sudanese, and South Sudanese origin share a common ethnicity and in some 
cases kinship links with their host communities in Ethiopia. Pastoralists of Somali and South Sudanese origin, for 
2 
 
example, have a history of cross-border seasonal migration into Ethiopia. These links render the concept of an 
international border invalid for some of these peoples, as well as complicating the concepts of ‘host’ and 
‘refugee’. Tribal identities also inform economic activity, with strongly defined gender roles and expectations for 
which types of work are acceptable, and not acceptable. Each of the refugee hosting regions has its own complex 
political economy and language. The degree of volatility in Gambella and Somali Regional State is high, with 
both refugee hosting areas displaying acute resource competition and tensions between tribal and ethnic groups. 
A detailed description of refugee groups and dynamics is included in annex 11.  
Note: a. Above secondary includes university, technical and vocational education, and other, but in total they 
represent a very small percentage: 5 percent of the total for men and less than 1 percent for women. 
4. 
The GoE has made an ambitious and unprecedented commitment toward a more 
comprehensive refugee response, shifting from a focus on encampment to more sustainable 
management of refugee populations. In September 2016, at the United Nations Summit on Refugees in 
New York, the GoE committed to nine pledges to improve refugee rights and services, becoming one of 
the first countries to initiate the implementation of the United Nations-backed Comprehensive Refugee 
Response Framework (CRRF), which focuses internationally on (a) measures to ease pressure on countries 
that welcome and host refugees, (b) supporting the self-reliance of refugees, (c) expanding access to 
resettlement and other complementary pathways, and (d) fostering conditions that enable refugees to return 
voluntarily to their home countries. While initial reforms target a subset of the refugee population, they 
constitute a potentially groundbreaking shift in the previous approach, which has largely assumed that 
refugees would return to their countries of origin and should be supported in camps until that time comes. 
5. 
Recognizing the opportunity to link socioeconomic opportunities for refugees with the 
broader industrialization agenda, the Government is taking bold steps to give refugees formal status 
and open its labor market to accommodate refugees despite having a demographic bulge and 
significant demand for jobs and constraints. This high-level pledge – referred to as the Jobs Compact - 
is a commitment to create economic opportunities, including in industrial parks, with a percentage dedicated 
to refugees.1 The commitment to provide opportunities for refugees is strongly in line with the World Bank 
Group’s eligibility criteria for IDA18 regional sub-window on refugees funding and links closely to the 
broader response on refugees, which highlights the need for sustainable solutions for refugee protection and 
service provision. Moreover, the government’s pledge is regarded as providing a global public good in 
terms of addressing universal challenges linked to forced displacement, human security, and development. 
The initiative combines the Government’s recent high-level changes to the refugee policy with the country’s 
industrialization strategy, providing refugees economic opportunities and aligning this commitment with 
the country’s structural transformation process. Both strategies are anchored in a broader set of reforms. 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context  
Refugee Policy  
6. 
The CRRF is at the center the Government’s new refugee policy; its implementation 
comprises four key elements: (a) the implementation of nine pledges (see box 2) which target a range of 
socioeconomic benefits for refugees, including expansion of the out-of-camp policy, improvements in 
rights and services, and access to work and livelihoods, (b) strengthening of the legal and policy framework, 
(c) supporting of host populations, and (d) strengthening of coordination mechanisms. ARRA and UNHCR 
are leading efforts to collaborate with donors, line ministries, and nongovernmental organizations to 
materialize the pledges into outcomes designed to strengthen the overall protection and assistance provided 
to refugees. Ultimately, the CRRF will allow refugees to become more independent and benefit from greater 
                                                          
1 The Government’s initial road map included a target of 100,000 economic opportunities, of which 30,000 would 
be for refugees.  
3 
 
integration into Ethiopian society. Various technical committees covering the six thematic areas of the 
pledges have been set up to guide their operationalization under the overall leadership of the CRRF Steering 
Committee Chairs comprising ARRA, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation (MoFEC), 
UNHCR, and a development partner adviser (the World Bank). 
7. 
The Jobs Compact pledge allows for the formal integration of refugees in Ethiopia’s labor 
market. Currently, formal employment and freedom of movement for refugees, as adopted in the 1951 
convention relating to the status of refugees, are taken as recommendations rather than legally binding 
obligations.2 Except for approximately 20,000 Eritrean refugees who reside in Addis Ababa under an out-
of-camp scheme, most refugees reside in camps with no prospects for formal employment. The pledges 
would extend wage earning employment to refugees, including in the manufacturing sector. Critically, they 
would also create the necessary enabling conditions for refugees to live out of camp, access improved 
services, protections and documentation. The pledges are ambitious and far-reaching, but will take time to 
implement and require the substantial support of the donor community. 
Box 2. The GoE’s Road Map to Improve the Rights of and Services for Refugees - Nine Pledges 
Out-of-camp Pledge 
x 
Expansion of the ‘Out-of-camp’ policy to benefit 10 percent of the current total refugee population 
Education Pledge 
x 
Increase of enrollment in primary, secondary, and tertiary education to all qualified refugees without 
discrimination and within the available resources 
Work and Livelihoods Pledges 
x 
Provision of work permits to refugees and to those with permanent residence ID, within the bounds 
of domestic law 
x 
Provision of work permits to refugees in the areas permitted for foreign workers, by giving priority 
to qualified refugees  
x 
Making available irrigable land to allow 100,000 people (among them refugees and local 
communities) to engage in crop production 
x 
Building industrial parks where a percentage of jobs will be committed to refugees 
Documentation Pledges 
x 
Provision of other benefits such as issuance of birth certificates to refugee children born in Ethiopia, 
and the possibility of opening bank accounts and obtaining driving licenses a 
Social and Basic Services Pledge 
x 
 Enhance the provision of basic and essential social services. 
Local Integration Pledge 
x 
Allowing for local integration for those protracted refugees who have lived for 20 years or more in 
Ethiopia 
Source: Road Map for the Implementation of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Government Pledges 
and the Practical Application of the CRRF in Ethiopia (November 29, 2017) 
Note: a. This also includes the provision of vital events registration services to refugees. 
8. 
The new Refugees Proclamation encompasses the rights and freedoms for refugees associated 
with the pledges in one legally binding document and is essential to establish the legal foundation to 
enable the planned reforms. The Proclamation has been approved by the Council of Ministers and will 
be tabled before Parliament. The passage of the Proclamation will pave the way for a further set of 
                                                          
2 This is an approach adopted by the Government to protect the national labor market and allow refugees to work 
only upon fulfilling certain criteria. 
4 
 
regulations and directives that will guide the operationalization of the pledges. The promulgation of the 
Refugees Proclamation is one of the effectiveness conditions for the IDA financing of the Program. 
Industrialization Strategy  
9. 
The Jobs Compact is being implemented in the context of the Government’s plans for rapid 
industrialization and structural transformation, with the ambitious aim of transitioning Ethiopia’s 
economy to lower-middle-income status by 2025. Ethiopia’s unique state-led and state-financed 
development model has focused primarily on public investment to address infrastructure and human capital 
deficits; an approach where the World Bank is engaged with the GoE, but which the World Bank’s 
Systematic Country Diagnostic acknowledges may begin to show limits in terms of future debt 
sustainability and private sector crowing out.3 The Government’s Growth and Transformation Plan II (GTP 
II, 2016–2020) focuses on large-scale safety net programs, expansion of basic services, and public 
investment in infrastructure. The key drivers of the vision identified in the GTP II are (a) leveraging of 
private investment in general and foreign direct investment (FDI), (b) implementation of measures that 
enhance export competitiveness and diversification, (c) development of industrial parks, (d) provision of 
quality infrastructure, and (e) skills development. The GTP II envisions Ethiopia as a lower-middle-income 
country by: (a) creating 2 million jobs in medium and large businesses by 2025, (b) increasing the 
contribution of manufacturing to overall GDP from the current level of under 5 percent to 18–20 percent, 
and (c) ensuring that the manufacturing sector contributes 50 percent of exports by 2025.  
10. 
A key focus of the Government’s industrial policy and transition to manufacturing is on the 
establishment of industrial parks throughout the country, which need to do more to attract investors, 
mobilize workers, and deal with externalities created by this fast-paced development. Currently, the 
Government has four publicly-owned operational industrial parks (Bole Lemi I, Hawassa, Mekelle and 
Kombolcha). Bole Lemi I and Hawassa are fully operational with spaces leased out to investors. 
Kombolcha and Mekelle were both inaugurated in July 2017 (with almost full subscription of space). Dire 
Dawa, Bole Lemi II, Kilinto, Adama, Jimma, Debree Birhan, and Bahir Dar industrial parks are under 
construction (a map of the locations of the industrial parks is shown in annex 12). Additional private parks 
such as Arerti, Eastern, Velocity, Huajian, and George Shoe are under construction. Key sectors prioritized 
for development include textiles, apparel, leather and leather products, agro-processing, pharmaceuticals, 
and chemicals. Most of the existing/operational industrial parks focus on the garment sector. For example, 
Bole Lemi I, Hawassa, Mekelle, and Kombolcha are all currently (or expected to) focus on garment and 
textiles. Underpinning the Government’s industrialization vision are several government entities, including 
the Prime Minister’s office, Ethiopian Investment Board, Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC), 
Industrial Parks Development Corporation (IPDC), Ministry of Industry, and MoFEC.  
11. 
Ethiopia’s employment strategy, including the Jobs Compact, has emphasized the need for 
jobs in more productive sectors, especially manufacturing. Indeed, the GTP II emphasizes the role of 
manufacturing enterprises as drivers for industrial development and the source of quality and sustainable 
jobs. The agricultural sector, employing more than 70 percent of the population, is not expected to keep 
pace with the growth of the working-age population, necessitating a fundamental movement of labor to 
higher productivity sectors (box 3 covers some of the key features and issues related to the labor market). 
Ethiopia has several advantages that it can leverage to harness the investment needed for job growth, 
including large infrastructure investments, low labor costs, cheap power, ideal climate, and established 
market access with the European Union and United States. 
 
                                                          
3 World Bank. 2014. “Ethiopia Systematic Country Diagnostic: Priorities for Ending Extreme Poverty and 
Promoting Shared Prosperity.”  
5 
 
Box 3. Ethiopia’s Labor Market 
Despite progress in recent years, Ethiopia faces several jobs challenges: (a) creating a sufficient number of jobs 
for a rapidly growing labor force; (b) improving labor productivity, earnings, and quality of these jobs; and (c) 
ensuring access to jobs for more vulnerable population, especially those in rural areas, youth, and women. 
Creating sufficient jobs. Ethiopia needs to create 1.7 million jobs to fully absorb the growing labor force each 
year. While overall labor market conditions have improved in the past 10 years, employment outcomes remain 
precarious. Although unemployment a decreased from 8.4 percent in 1999 to 5.2 percent in 2013, with a 
significant decrease in urban areas (from 35.9 percent in 1999 to 21.7 percent in 2013), underemployment b 
remains high (22 percent), especially in rural areas. Moreover, despite fast economic growth, the country has 
experienced very slow structural transformation. The agricultural share of employment decreased from 77.9 
percent in 1999 to 73.8 percent in 2013, but remains very high. 
Improving labor productivity and quality of jobs. While the average labor productivity has increased by 67 
percent between 2005 and 2013, mainly driven by productivity improvements in agriculture and wholesale and 
retail trade, overall labor productivity remains low. Notably, despite the large increase, the output per worker in 
manufacturing remained low in 2013, higher only than the output per worker in the agricultural sector. Overall, 
only 12 percent of workers in Ethiopia work in a wage relationship and their earnings remain quite low (monthly 
median wage earnings amounted to 979 ETB in 2013). The remaining 88 percent are either self-employed or 
unpaid family workers. As a result, informality remains very high, even in urban areas, where among the wage 
employees, that is, excluding persons engaged in subsistence farming and those who work in private households, 
25.8 were working in the informal sector in 2013.c 
Ensuring access to vulnerable groups. There are both regional differences in labor market outcomes and 
pronounced disparities among different population groups. In 2013, the employment rate was as high as 86 
percent in rural areas compared to 63 percent in urban areas. Unemployment rates were seven times higher in 
urban than in rural areas. Younger workers (15 to 29 years old) have lower labor force participation rates, lower 
employment rates, and higher unemployment rates than older workers. Younger workers also are more likely to 
earn wages that are below the national poverty line. Women have systematically worse outcomes than men. In 
urban areas, 27 percent of young women were unemployed in 2013 (rising to 32 percent in Addis Ababa). For 
young women in wage employment, one-third earn below the poverty line. 
Note: a. Using the International Labour Organization’s (ILOs) relaxed definition of unemployment and in line 
with the standards of the Ethiopian Central Statistical Agency (CSA), an individual is classified as unemployed if 
he/she did not work at least 1 hour in the reference week and he was available for work in the reference period. b. 
A working-age individual who is employed, but works fewer than 35 hours per week and would like to work 
more. c. For exact definition, see CSA (2014) Analytical Report on the 2013 National Labour Force Survey. 
Addis Ababa.  
Source: World Bank (forthcoming). Ethiopia: Employment and Jobs Study. Washington, D.C. 
12. 
Ethiopia is using these advantages to attract investment and generate jobs. According to the 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 2016 report, Ethiopia attracted the most FDI in 
Africa that year. The country is being perceived as an attractive investment destination and major investors 
have seized the opportunity to set up production facilities in the industrial parks. For instance, the Bole 
Lemi I industrial park is fully leased to 11 investors and is operational, focusing on footwear and garment 
exports; 13,000 jobs have been created. The recently operationalized Hawassa industrial park has been 
committed to 25 investors (foreign and domestic) and is expected to generate approximately 60,000 jobs 
and US$1 billion in exports when it becomes fully operational. The investor pipeline for the recently 
completed Mekelle and Kombolcha industrial parks has led to almost full subscription of the spaces in these 
establishments. There are also five private sector investors that have been licensed to develop and operate 
industrial parks. In 2017, the World Bank Group granted the GoE a global ‘Star Reformer Award’ for its 
effective FDI-related reforms and the resulting success.  
13. 
Despite these successes, Ethiopia continues to have a challenging business-enabling 
environment. Greater private sector competitiveness is required to unlock the investment and resulting job 
growth needed to fulfill the goals of the Jobs Compact. Ethiopia ranks 108 out of 137 economies in the 
6 
 
Global Competitiveness Index 2017/18 and 161 out of 190 countries in the 2018 Doing Business rankings. 
Moreover, Ethiopia’s landlocked position, poor trade logistics, input shortages, high input prices, and 
access to land and finance (including foreign exchange) present challenges for export-oriented growth. 
Several private sector development constraints need to be addressed for investment and job growth to take 
place. 
C.  Relationship to the CAS/CPF and Rationale for Use of Instrument  
14. 
The proposed operation directly supports the focus areas of the Country Partnership 
Framework (CPF) FY18–21, which prioritizes structural and economic transformation, resilience 
and inclusiveness, and institutional capacity. The objectives directly supported include (a) Objective 1.1 
enhanced business and investment climate, (b) Objective 1.5 new approaches for sustainable infrastructure 
financing and debt management, (c) Objective 2.6 increased access to services and job opportunities for 
refugees and host communities, and (d) Objective 3.1 increased capacity and improved governance in 
service delivery. The relationship between the Economic Opportunities Program and the CPF focus areas 
and objectives are further described in annex 1a.  
15. 
The operation contributes to achieving the IDA18 regional sub-window on refugees objectives 
of (a) creating social and economic development opportunities for refugees and host communities and 
(b) facilitating solutions to protracted refugee situations, including through the sustainable 
socioeconomic inclusion of refugees in the host country. Results area 1 will focus on providing 
recognized refugees economic opportunities in wage earning employment as well as self-employment and 
the right to engage in commercial activities. Combined with a package of services that will match refugees 
to available opportunities, the activities will contribute to ensuring the socioeconomic inclusion of refugees 
in Ethiopia. Given that the opportunities sought for refugees will need to be created within the context of a 
developing economy where there are limited opportunities in productive sectors, the remaining results areas 
focus on creating an environment to expand investment and jobs growth in the manufacturing sector. 
Addressing economywide constraints such as low labor productivity and quality of jobs, poor investment 
climate (including investment promotion), and limited compliance with environmental and social (E&S) 
safeguards in industrial parks will open more opportunities for investment in manufacturing that will benefit 
Ethiopians and refugees. The Program contributes to and supports the Government policy note, which 
articulates a strategic approach to move toward long-term solutions that benefit refugees and host 
communities.  
16. 
A hybrid Program for Results (PforR)/Investment Project Financing (IPF) operation is 
chosen to address the mix of policy actions, investment activity, and technical assistance to achieve 
the desired outcomes of the Economic Opportunities Program. Such a broad level of support would not 
be feasible through a IPF, PforR or a Development Policy instrument alone. The hybrid operation has 
several advantages, including the following:  
(a) Focus on results. Implementation of the Jobs Compact requires a strong focus on results, 
ensuring not only that legal and policy actions benefitting refugees take place but also that the 
right enabling environment conditions (such as E&S protections) are in place to generate 
economic opportunities in an environmentally and socially sustainable way. Program 
performance will demand incentives in addition to accountability for results, which will be 
made possible using the instrument.  
(b) Aligning incentives to build capacity within government programs. Building institutional 
capacity and strengthening systems is a priority for achieving development outcomes in a 
sustainable manner. The financing provided through the IPF instrument will address some of 
the core issues affecting the performance of the Government’s program through targeted 
7 
 
technical assistance. The IPF instrument will also help manage risks and capacity constraints 
by piloting initiatives that can be scaled up over time, with the eventual goal of utilizing 
government systems under the PforR.  
(c) Enhancing the World Bank’s ability to partner. The PforR provides a platform for other 
development partners supporting the Jobs Compact by pooling resources and focusing more 
directly on achievement of results for the needed reforms. 
(d) Flexibility. The instrument supports a program of critical investments (that can cover 
infrastructure and technical assistance) over time in addition to regulatory and institutional 
improvements. It also allows for a flexible and scalable disbursement schedule provided 
results are achieved and verified. 
(e) Adaptability. This Program is dealing with a new topic where there is no previous experience 
in Ethiopia and very limited international experience. As the GoE moves to implement the 
results, it is likely to identify the need to adapt planned measures and develop additional 
measures; moreover, some planned measures may not be needed.  
17. 
The experience of the Economic Opportunities for Jordanians and Syrian Refugees Project 
(P159522), from which the Program derives critical lessons learned (discussed further in annex 10), 
has been instrumental in demonstrating the appropriateness of a results-based instrument to manage 
the complexity of the refugee and jobs agenda. In the Jordan case, the work permit results area has proven 
very challenging and has required the Government, through a highly consultative dialogue, to implement 
numerous incremental adjustments to the work permit regime to achieve the targeted results. The PforR 
instrument has provided the necessary adaptability in Jordan. To achieve the results in this project it is 
anticipated that a similar process will be implemented.  
D. 
Government Program  
18. 
The overarching objective of the Government’s Jobs Compact Program is to create economic 
opportunities for Ethiopians and refugees. The Jobs Compact is a new program attuned to the CRRF 
process and the Government’s broader industrialization strategy. To provide focus, the Government’s 
program is targeting a subset of these broader reforms and activities that are most closely tied to securing 
investment in the manufacturing sector and job creation. In parallel, and in line with the Government’s 
vision of self-reliance for refugees, a set of reforms and interventions will allow refugees to benefit from 
opportunities without putting undue strain on host communities. Figure 1 illustrates the relationship 
between the industrialization strategy, refugee policy, Jobs Compact Program and Program supported by 
the PforR. 
8 
 
Figure 1. Illustration of the Jobs Compact Program 
19. 
The Government’s Jobs Compact Program covers the following work streams:  
(a) Refugee-related employment and protection. This includes providing the legal basis for 
refugees to take up employment opportunities and tailoring the work application process and 
other procedures to ensure that they are appropriate and attainable for refugee populations. 
Additional considerations linked to housing, skills development, employer/employment 
matching capability, and structures of oversight to ensure that refugees’ rights and wellbeing 
are included here.  
(b) Improving the broader investment climate. The Government has prioritized significant 
investments in transport logistics and power to help crowd in private investment. Additional 
reforms have included the rollout of ‘One Stop Shop’ (OSS) services (labor units in industrial 
parks) and a ‘Client Charter’ on the turnaround and fees on key investor registration processes. 
This area also includes strengthening investment promotion capabilities. The targeting of 
large numbers of high quality, responsible, and sustainable investors is a critical pillar of 
Ethiopia’s industrialization drive, as is the active encouragement of buyer-supplier 
relationships to boost Ethiopian exports in competitive sectors. Strengthening these efforts 
will require targeted sector strategies, promotion, outreach, follow-up, and investor aftercare. 
This workstream will also include an institutional development component to raise the EIC’s 
performance to the level of the best in the region.  
(c) Improving labor productivity and quality of jobs. This includes providing interventions to 
improve worker skills and reduce levels of absenteeism and turnover. Much of the Ethiopian 
labor force is new to both the formal sector and factory-based work and this transition will 
need carefully targeted policies that improve labor sourcing, grading, and the provision of soft 
and technical skills training. This also includes encouraging good working conditions and 
adequacy of related social infrastructure for workers in industrial parks, which are conducive 
to improving labor productivity.  
(d) Further enhancing Ethiopia’s reputation on E&S issues (enhancing the sustainability of 
existing industrial parks). Ethiopia’s reputation for sustainable and inclusive development 
is both an important end in itself and a prominent part of the ‘brand’ for investment promotion. 
Jobs 
Compact 
Program 
CRRF and 
Nine Pledges 
 
Industrialization 
Strategy 
 
Program 
Supported 
by PforR 
9 
 
The commitment to carbon neutral growth, zero liquid discharge facilities at the Hawassa 
industrial park, and other investments have played an important part in this effort. Future 
activities will include detailed E&S assessment of future industrial park projects, innovative 
approaches to rainfall capture and solar power generation, and adherence to global best 
practice on social compliance in both industrial park construction and in the dominant garment 
sector protection of the (predominately female) workforce.  
(e) Construction of industrial parks. To prioritize scarce resources and capture the spillover 
benefits of clustering, the Government has prioritized the development of industrial parks in 
regions across the country. Building on the success of—and learning lessons from—the 
Hawassa industrial park, the Government is targeting the development of 20 million m2 of 
factory floor space over 100,000 ha of land by 2025. In addition to public sector initiatives, 
the Government is also seeking to expand the number of private sector developers through 
the establishment of a centralized land bank and a targeted incentive package.  
20. 
The EIC is managing the Government’s program as the implementation agency in 
collaboration with ARRA and other government agencies, including IPDC, Ministry of Labor and 
Social Affairs (MoLSA), and MoFEC in addition to donor partners comprising the World Bank Group, 
U.K. Department for International Development (DFID), European Union, and European Investment Bank 
(EIB). The donor partners have indicated their intent to provide a financing package of more than US$550 
million for the Government’s Jobs Compact program (including the proposed operation). The following list 
summarizes the envelope of funding and expected activities of each Jobs Compact donor:  
x 
DFID (£80 million) will provide direct financing to the government, as well as financing to 
the Increasing Economic

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

velopment operations. Annex 1a elaborates on the rationale for some of the excluded program 
expenditures.  
Table 1. Program Boundary 
 
Government’s Jobs Compact 
Program Supported by PforR 
Objective 
To provide economic opportunities for 
Ethiopians and refugees  
To provide economic opportunities for 
Ethiopians and refugees in an 
environmentally and socially sustainable 
way
Program Description  
(a) Refugee-related employment and 
protection 
(b) Improving the broader investment 
climate (including investment promotion 
activities) 
(c) Improving labor productivity and 
quality of jobs  
(d) Further enhancing Ethiopia’s 
reputation on environmental and social 
issues 
(e) Construction of industrial parks 
(a) Refugee-related employment and 
protection 
(b) Improving the broader investment 
climate (including some investment 
promotion activities) 
(c) Improving labor productivity and 
quality of jobs  
(d) Enhancing the sustainability of 
existing industrial parks 
 
Geographic Scope 
All areas of Ethiopia where industrial 
parks are located 
The Program will focus on publicly 
owned operational industrial parks and 
urban centers where economic 
opportunities are most likely to be 
created 
Implementation period 
(Calendar Year) 
2018–2024 
2018–2024 
 
Cost (US$, millions) 
550 
307.7 
11 
 
24. 
The direct Program beneficiaries are refugees living in Ethiopia and Ethiopians seeking 
economic opportunities in the private sector, who will all benefit from the underlying reforms and 
results of the operation. The Government is also a key beneficiary of the technical assistance to be 
provided by the Program.  
x 
Refugees. Nearly 30,000 refugees will benefit principally through their improved legal status, 
which will facilitate their self-sufficiency over time. Based on the skill profile of refugees 
(summarized in box 4), an estimated 10–16 percent of refugees are expected to find 
opportunities in industrial parks. Rights included under the Refugees Proclamation such as 
the right to live out of camps, access to legal documentation, ability to open bank accounts, 
and measures that support access to compliant housing and better work will also improve their 
living conditions.  
x 
Ethiopians. Improved enabling environment conditions for investment and links made 
between international buyers and local suppliers will generate more jobs in the manufacturing 
sector for Ethiopians. Ethiopians seeking opportunities in industrial parks will benefit from 
the increased compliance measures introduced through the Program, such as improved health 
and safety standards, in addition to opportunities for skills training. Refugee-hosting 
communities will benefit from complementary capacity building to PESs which will assist 
them in their jobs search and job matching.  
x 
Private sector, including investors. The private sector will benefit from the enhanced 
investment climate for business resulting from specific reforms, as well as improved 
structures of dialogue and expanded investment/aftercare measures.  
x 
Government. The EIC, ARRA, and select regional Bureaus of Labor and Social Affairs 
(BoLSAs) will benefit from technical assistance that will be provided by the Program, 
focusing on capacity building and institutional strengthening to carry out the objectives of the 
Economic Opportunities Program. 
25. 
Table 2 shows the share of the PforR Program financed by IDA, including MDTF co-
financing. As part of the Board Consultation Note that was discussed on September 29, 2017, Ethiopia was 
approved as an eligible country to receive financing from the IDA18 regional sub-window on refugees. 
Table 2. PforR Program Financing (US$, millions) 
Source  
Amount 
Percentage of Total 
Government 
44.09
14.3
IDA national allocation 
34.44
11.2
IDA18 regional sub-window on refugees 
166.67
54.2
MDTF co-financing (pending approval)  
62.5
20.3
Total Program financing 
307.7
100
26. 
Table 3 shows the financing for the entire operation. The Program will be financed as a hybrid 
PforR/IPF operation. The IPF will finance a project preparation advance, which will provide support to the 
Project Coordination Unit (PCU) as well as technical assistance and institutional capacity building 
(discussed further in annex 1b). 
 
 
12 
 
Table 3. Financing for the Operation (US$, millions) 
Source  
PforR 
IPF 
Total 
IDA national allocation 
34.44
0.89
35.33
IDA18 regional sub-window on refugees 
166.67
0.00
166.67
MDTF co-financing (pending approval) 
62.50
25.00
87.50
Total for Operation  
263.61
25.89
289.50
27. 
The expenditure framework combines expenditures related to the Government’s refugee 
management program and its industrialization strategy, as well as initiatives to promote investment 
and improve investment climate, including improving labor productivity. The expenditure framework 
for the Program covers recurrent expenditures by primary government agencies involved in these initiatives 
which include ARRA, EIC, IPDC, and MoLSA. Over six years, expenditures are estimated to be US$307.7 
million, supporting the Government to maintain the activities of key ministries and agencies involved in 
the Program, as illustrated in table 4. Further details relating to the budget structure and classification are 
described in annex 1a. 
Table 4. Program Expenditure Framework (US$, millions) 
  
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
Total 
  
Budget 
Forecast 
  
Refugee Related Employment and 
Protection 
  
Salaries and benefits 
12.2 
12.2
12.2
12.2
12.2
12.2
12.2
85.2 
Other administrative and operating 
costs 
7.1 
7.1 
7.1 
7.1 
7.1 
7.1 
7.1 
49.9 
Subtotal 
19.3 
19.3 
19.3 
19.3 
19.3 
19.3 
19.3 
135.1 
Improving Investment Climate 
  
Management and administration 
0.8 
0.9
1.0
1.2
1.3
1.5
1.7
8.5 
Promoting and attracting FDI  
0.3 
0.4
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.7
3.4 
Investment projects support‚ 
facilitation, and regulation  
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
1.0 
1.1 
1.2 
6.2 
Investment research and studies 
0.3 
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.6
3.2 
Subtotal 
2.0 
2.3 
2.6 
2.9 
3.3 
3.8 
4.3 
21.3 
Improving Labor Productivity and 
Quality of Jobs 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
Management and administration 
1.0 
1.0
1.1
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.9
9.4 
Harmonious industrial relations 
0.2 
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.4
2.1 
Employment service promotion 
0.6 
0.8
0.9
1.1
1.2
1.4
1.5
7.5 
Subtotal 
1.8 
2.1 
2.3 
2.6 
3.0 
3.4 
3.8 
19.1 
Enhancing Sustainability of IP 
  
Salaries and benefits 
1.7 
1.8
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.9
2.0
13.2 
Other administrative and operating 
costs 
12.3 
12.5 
12.7 
12.8 
13.0 
13.2 
13.4 
89.9 
Supplies 
0.6 
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
4.0 
Fire prevention and protection 
3.5 
3.5
3.5
3.6
3.6
3.7
3.7
25.1 
Subtotal 
18.1 
18.4 
18.6 
18.9 
19.1 
19.4 
19.7 
132.3 
Grand Total 
41.3 
42.0 
42.9 
43.8 
44.8 
45.9 
47.1 
307.7 
28. 
The Program complements and reinforces the broader engagement of the World Bank Group 
and other development partners in a number of ways. Primarily, the Program enhances World Bank 
Group and donor partner support to industrialization, including through supporting labor productivity, 
encouraging investment promotion and supporting infrastructure planning. It also links to operations 
13 
 
focusing on private sector development and expansion of basic services in Ethiopia. The implementation 
of the Program will rely on lessons learned from existing World Bank Group operations as well as ongoing 
analytical work. A table illustrating complementary programs in included in annex 10.  
C. Disbursement Linked Indicators and Verification Protocols  
29. 
The Program’s disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) were developed in collaboration with 
the Government and are presented in table 5. These DLIs were chosen based on their relevance to the 
Economic Opportunities Program objective of providing economic opportunities in an environmentally and 
socially sustainable way and to support the Program’s overall results chain. The DLIs target some of the 
constraints linked to the creation of economic opportunities while also supporting the government’s vision 
of growth in the manufacturing sector. The DLIs fulfill the requirements of being tangible, transparent, 
verifiable, and under the Government’s control. The selected DLIs also consider the areas where the 
Program is best placed to add value without duplicating efforts in other World Bank Group-financed 
operations and other donor programs.  
Table 5. Description of the DLIs 
DLI 
Description 
Results area 1: Refugee-related Employment and Protection 
1 
Number of refugees with access to economic opportunities 
Results area 2: Improving the Broader Investment Climate 
2 
Number of targeted investment facilitations by EIC increased 
Results area 3: Improving Labor Productivity and Quality of Jobs  
3 
Disclosure of Better Work synthesis compliance reports and MoLSA synthesis inspection reports 
Results area 4: Enhancing the Sustainability of Existing Industrial Parks 
4 
Ethiopian Investment Board decision made on feasibility study of private sector-led participation in Bole 
Lemi I, Hawassa, Mekelle, or Kombolcha Industrial Park
Results area 5: Fiduciary Systems Strengthening 
5 
Procurement Directives and Manuals issued and used by IPDC and ARRA based on legal framework issued 
by Federal Government and IPDC unqualified/clean entity financial audit report issued, based on 
International Financial Reporting Standard (IFRS)-compliant financial statements submitted on time
Results area 6: Safeguards Systems Strengthening 
6 
An established environmental and social risk management system that addresses respective risks
30. 
Sequencing of DLIs and Program interventions. The timing and sequencing of Program 
interventions have been carefully considered in the overall design of the targets for the DLIs. Most 
importantly, there will be a slow ramp-up of targets on economic opportunities for refugees to allow 
sufficient time to develop government systems to manage social integration of refugees living out of camp 
as well as pilot the Employment Promotion and Protection (EPP) initiative, discussed further in box 4. 
Moreover, as refugees and Ethiopians are gradually provided economic opportunities, the interventions that 
focus on creating a pipeline of jobs and improving the quality of jobs will be implemented (for example, 
investor mobilization and E&S compliance measures in factories). While DLI 1 has a specific focus on 
refugees, all other results areas will benefit both Ethiopians and refugees by addressing economywide 
constraints that expand the number and quality of economic opportunities available. 
Results Area 1: Refugee-related Employment and Protection 
31. 
Number of refugees with access to economic opportunities. This results area includes providing 
refugees with economic opportunities and ensuring integration of refugees in the formal labor market and 
taking measures to provide related services to refugees, including ensuring that refugees are able to relocate 
to areas where economic opportunities will be provided. Economic opportunities are defined as formal 
wage employment, own account self-employment, and/or entrepreneurship through a formally registered 
14 
 
business. Access is defined as having the required legal status and accompanying documentation (for 
example, work permits, business licenses, and/or residence permits) to engage in gainful employment. 
Economic opportunities may include opportunities within industrial parks, but will not be limited to parks. 
Procedures for the operationalization of the pledges relevant to enabling refugees to work formally are in 
the process of being developed and are likely to evolve as the Refugees Proclamation and associated 
regulations are adopted. Box 4 describes the support that will be provided by the EPP pilot to address some 
of the challenges linked to labor market integration and relocation. DLI 6, focusing on government systems 
to manage E&S risks, expands on the measures that will need to be in place for the social integration of 
refugees living out of camp.  
Table 6. DLI 1 (US$116.12 million4, including prior result) 
DLI 
Prior Result 
Baseline 
YR 1 
YR 2 
YR 3 
YR 4 
YR 5 
YR 6 
Number of refugees 
with access to 
economic 
opportunities  
Refugees 
Proclamation 
promulgated 
0 
100 
2,600 
7,600 
17,600 
24,000 
30,000 
 
Box 4. Addressing Labor Market Integration Challenges for Refugees in Ethiopia 
Refugee demographics, including high dependency ratios, and low educational attainment present challenges to 
refugees’ formal labor market integration. Only 40 percent of refugees in Ethiopia are of working age and, hence, 
can potentially participate in the labor market. However, given the large number of children among refugees and 
a high share of households headed by women, many refugees may find it difficult to participate in the labor 
market. Indeed, currently only 33.3 percent of refugees are in the labor force, that is, either employed (81.2 
percent) or unemployed (18.8 percent). Furthermore, educational attainment of refugees is very low. There are 
large disparities between men and women, with the latter being significantly less educated, and by ethnic group. 
Furthermore, language barriers, lack of sufficient work experience, along with family responsibilities, are the 
most important concerns limiting mobility of refugees. Refugees cite support in skills training and provision of 
education, health, family relocation, and childcare services as needed to help them take advantage of economic 
opportunities. Further detail and data on refugees’ labor market integration is included in the Program’s technical 
assessment (annex 4). 
The EPP pilot. The IPF instrument (discussed in annex 1b) will include a comprehensive package of services 
and financial assistance that will help connect refugees to economic opportunities. These opportunities could be 
in waged employment, potentially but not exclusively within the existing industrial parks, or in new 
entrepreneurial business start-ups, or as self-employed/own account workers. A pilot program, targeting between 
5,000 and 10,000 refugees, will build a nuanced understanding of the profile of these refugees and their match 
with labor market need, as well as constraints in the wider system. This will inform the nature and scale-up of 
further assistance. The pilot program will be delivered by between four and eight service providers across two to 
four refugee camps, allowing for a comparison of approaches and facilitating performance management. The 
providers will be contracted with outcome-based payments tied to sustained employment (not service inputs); 
focusing the program on results and encouraging innovation. The journey of each refugee through the program 
will be personalized according to their profile and goal, but it is likely to entail: initial engagement and screening; 
goal setting and action planning; supported job search and/or matching; psycho-social input, including functional 
language, soft skills and family engagement; economic input, such as short, demand-led vocational training or 
business planning; assistance with legal requirements, notably work permits; practical support, possibly in 
relocation, settling-in allowances or the purchase of tools, and; particularly intensive early in-work support. For 
job matching in industrial parks, the EPP pilot implementation will learn from the results of the upcoming 
Hawassa Industrial Park Community Impact Evaluation measuring welfare impacts for employees, their origin 
households, and communities. Given the complexity of the EPP, it will be managed using the IPF instrument 
where it can be potentially scaled-up using government systems under the PforR.  
                                                          
4 The financing calculated for the DLIs includes co-financing to be contributed from the IEO-MDTF 
15 
 
Results Area 2: Improving the Investment Climate  
32. 
Number of targeted investment facilitations by EIC increased. This results area focuses on 
promoting the country’s investment opportunities and improving conditions for foreign and domestic 
investors, including carrying out targeted investment facilitations to ensure a pipeline of investors in 
industrial parks. Based on GTP II targets, the EIC alongside other relevant government agencies has been 
tasked with increasing the flow of FDI and enhancing the participation of domestic investors in the 
manufacturing sector. Key to ensuring the creation of more and better economic opportunities for 
Ethiopians and refugees will be ensuring a pipeline of investors in the industrial parks and priority sectors 
and the active encouragement of buyer-supplier relationships in competitive sectors. Targeted investment 
facilitation will include proactive actions, including total number of site visits arranged for investors, 
processed visas, matching made between buyers and suppliers (defined through a formalized contractual 
relationship), memorandums of understanding (MoUs)/lease agreements and other documents prepared on 
behalf of investors, investor licenses issued, and investor aftercare resulting in successful resolution. The 
prior result is the amendment of the forex retention policy and change in the debt-equity ratio that will, 
respectively (a) allow for the opening of the foreign exchange retention account for eligible exporters of 
goods and services and (b) incentivize eligible exports of goods and services by increasing the debt to equity 
ratio for foreign investors to access a loan. Achievement of the targeted DLI will be led by the EIC and the 
verification process for the achievement of this DLI will rely on data capturing systems currently being set 
up in the EIC that focus on Customer Relationship Management (CRM).  
Table 7. DLI 2 (US$52.5 million, including prior result) 
DLI 
Prior Result 
Baseline 
YR1 
YR2 
YR3 
YR4 
YR5 
YR6 
Number of targeted 
investment 
facilitations by EIC 
increased  
National Bank of 
Ethiopia (NBE) 
Directives amended to 
permit establishment 
of foreign exchange 
accounts and to permit 
higher debt-equity 
ratio for foreign 
investors 
250 
550 
850 
1150 
1450 
1750 
— 
Results Area 3: Improving Labor Productivity and Quality of Jobs 
33. 
Disclosure of Better Work compliance synthesis reports and MoLSA synthesis inspection 
report. The activities on improving labor productivity and quality of jobs focus on improving and 
supervising the work environment (for example, conducting labor inspections and wage bargaining) and 
increasing compliance with international labor protection standards and local labor laws. Better Work is a 
comprehensive program bringing together all levels of the garment industry to improve working conditions 
and respect of labor rights for workers and boost the competitiveness of apparel businesses. Better Work 
focuses on the garment sector and targets a range of social compliance issues, for example, overtime, 
chemicals and hazardous substances, worker accommodation, worker protection and gender, among other 
areas. Better Work has been shown to increase worker productivity by improving working conditions, 
including through a reduction of workplace injuries, decrease of verbal abuse and providing supervisory 
skills training. Through transparent disclosure, Better Work gives buyers a clear picture of the labor 
situation in factories where they place orders, thereby pushing factories to improve their working 
conditions. A detailed description of Better Work is included in box 5. The targeted DLI will focus on 
public disclosure by the GoE of the Better Work report through the program’s website. The ILO is working 
in Ethiopia to build the capacity of government, as well as of workers’ and employers’ organizations, with 
the objective of supporting the development of a socially sustainable textile and garment industry through