[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 48397 chars (30.9% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
1. 
Ethiopia has achieved high levels of economic growth and significant advances in human 
development and poverty reduction. Real gross domestic product (GDP) growth has averaged 10.5 
percent per year between 2003/04 and 2015/16, reflecting agricultural modernization, the development 
of new export sectors, strong global commodity demand, and Government-led development investments. 
Ethiopia is among the countries that have made the fastest progress toward the Millennium Development 
Goals and improvements on the Human Development Index. Life expectancy rose from 52 years in 2000 
to 63 years in 2011 and extreme poverty fell from 55.3 percent in 2000 to 29 percent in 2014, based on 
the measure of US$1.90 per day.  
2. 
Overall inequality remains low in Ethiopia, but economic growth has not been fully inclusive 
and millions of people remain vulnerable to shocks. While Ethiopia continues to be one of the most equal 
countries in the world (with a Gini coefficient of 0.3), consumption growth of the bottom 40 percent of 
the population did not match the consumption growth of the top 60 percent from 2005 to 2014, a period 
of high economic growth. Falling—and converging—poverty rates across regions mask significant 
disparities within regions and among woredas. While agricultural growth has been one of the main drivers 
of poverty reduction, the benefits have not been sufficient for everyone, especially marginal farmers who 
are vulnerable to drought. During the El Niño-induced drought of 2016/17, for example, almost 20 percent 
of the rural population required safety net support to meet their basic food needs. This highlights the 
need for inclusive structural transformation that provides opportunities in urban areas and allows people 
to move out of marginal agricultural areas.  
3. 
Ethiopia has a strong foundation to sustainable, inclusive growth, although challenges remain. 
A series of ambitious Growth and Transformation Plans (GTPs) set out the structural transformation of 
Ethiopia toward a middle-income country by 2025. Within the focus on high and sustained rates of 
economic growth is a commitment by the Government for this growth to be equitable. This will require 
continued investments in agricultural growth supported by public investments in basic service provision 
and rural safety nets, which led to the significant reduction in poverty over the past decade, as well as the 
skills that will enable people to take advantages of efforts to promote job creation in industry and services. 
The rising frequency and severity of droughts points to the need for Ethiopia’s national systems to be 
designed and delivered in a way that can respond to crisis, which will harness the country’s investments 
in basic services and safety nets, while also promoting its shift to a middle-income country. 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
4. 
Ethiopia has made important advances in social protection. In 2005, the Government launched 
the Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP), which provides predictable safety net support to chronically 
food insecure people in chronically food insecure rural areas. More recently, the Government has put in 
place a strong policy foundation for the social protection sector, with the approval of the National Social 
Protection Policy (NSPP) 20141 and National Social Protection Strategy 2016.2 The policy and strategy are 
                                                          
1 FDRE (Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia). 2014. “Ethiopia National Social Protection Policy.” 
2 FDRE. 2016. “National Social Protection Strategy.” 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 123  
  
 
organized around the following five focus areas: productive safety nets; livelihoods and employment 
support; social insurance; access to health, education, and other social services; and addressing violence, 
abuse, and exploitation. Across these areas, the policy and strategy seek to bring together a variety of 
existing programs into a national social protection system for supporting vulnerable Ethiopians. 
5. 
The Government aims to move away from delivering safety net support through a set of 
programs and toward a national safety net system. The three largest programs providing safety net 
support in Ethiopia are the PSNP, Humanitarian Food Assistance (HFA),3 and the recently launched Urban 
Productive Safety Net Program (UPSNP). The PSNP provides cash or food transfers to 8 million chronically 
food insecure people in rural areas in exchange for participation in public works (PW) or as direct support. 
The HFA provides food and cash transfers (sometimes called food aid) to people who are negatively 
affected by shocks, particularly drought, in rural areas. The UPSNP provides cash transfers to urban poor 
living below the poverty line in 11 major cities in exchange for participation in public works or as direct 
support. Among these three programs, the PSNP and UPSNP provide a solid foundation for the national 
safety net system because (a) both programs include a component that provides unconditional safety net 
support to households that are unlikely to graduate from poverty (called Permanent Direct Support [PDS]), 
which is overseen by the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (MoLSA); (b) both programs provide safety 
net transfers in exchange for participation in PW; and (c) through these two programs, the Government 
is building core administrative systems and tools that will improve the coordination and information 
sharing among these and other programs.4  
6. 
Despite the Government’s aim to shift from a reliance on humanitarian appeals to a predictable 
safety net, the HFA continues to support a large number of people in rural areas. When the PSNP was 
launched in 2005, there was an expectation that the need for the Government to issue humanitarian 
appeals for food assistance would reduce. In fact, flows of HFA to rural areas have continued to be 
significant, reaching a high of 10.2 million people in 2016 in response to the El Niño-induced drought (see 
Figure 1). Although the PSNP supports chronically food insecure households and the HFA supports 
households that are transitory food insecure because of drought and other shocks (called emergency food 
needs) and are managed by two separate agencies, in practice, the target populations reside in the same 
communities and are supported with food and cash transfers through similar delivery modalities (see 
Annex 4). Integrating these two programs under a common framework would thus provide a strong 
foundation for a national safety net system in rural areas.  
7. 
To protect those vulnerable to drought, the Government set out a vision for a scalable safety 
net system in rural areas. The NSPP and the National Policy and Strategy for Disaster Risk Management 
(and its associated investment framework) outline a vision for a rural safety net that scales up in response 
to shocks. To implement this vision, the design of fourth phase of the PSNP (2015–2020) adopted a 
‘continuum of response’, which intended to sequence support to food insecure households first through 
                                                          
3 HFA is defined as the provision of direct transfers to individuals or households for the purpose of increasing the quantity 
and/or quality of food consumption in anticipation of, during, and in the aftermath of a humanitarian crisis. As such, it includes 
both in-kind food transfers and cash transfers for smoothing consumption.  
4 While these two programs provide the foundational pieces, given the unique nature of poverty and vulnerability in urban and 
rural areas, the Government intends to operate the UPSNP separately for the near future. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 123  
  
 
the PSNP and its contingency budgets and then through the HFA.5 However, in 2015, the National Disaster 
Risk Management Commission (NDRMC) was created. This involved splitting the previous Disaster Risk 
Management and Food Security Sector into two: (i) the newly formed NDRMC, which has overall 
responsibility for the coordination of disaster management and direct implementation responsibility for 
HFA, reporting directly to the Deputy Prime Minister; and (ii) the Food Security Sector, which retained 
responsibility for the PSNP, remaining within the Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources (MoANR). 
The NDRMC thus manages the provision of cash and food transfers through the HFA, while the MoANR 
manages the provision of cash and food transfers through the PSNP. For both the PSNP and HFA, food 
transfers are channelled through the Government’s food management system, which is currently the 
responsibility of the NDRMC; cash transfers of the PSNP are channelled through the Ministry of Finance 
and Economic Cooperation (MoFEC) and cash transfers of the HFA channelled through the NDRMC.  
Figure 1. PSNP and Humanitarian Caseloads, Millions of People, 1992–2016 
 
Source: World Bank. 2017. “Quantifying the Cost of Drought in Ethiopia: A Technical Note.” Draft. 
8. 
While the Government-led response to the El Niño drought of 2015 and 2016 protected citizens 
from famine, it highlighted weaknesses in how the PSNP and HFA together respond to drought. The 
Government-led response to the El Niño drought is lauded internationally for enabling Ethiopia to avoid 
famine. Despite this achievement, the response revealed limitations in how the ‘continuum of response’ 
was set out and the difficulties of coordinating the response across the NDRMC and MoANR. Symptoms 
included limited coordination in the delivery of the PSNP and HFA to the same communities, including a 
lack of common decision making on the provision of cash or food transfers; that the needs assessment 
was not designed to consider potential additional food needs of the PSNP clients and a lack of reporting 
on progress and bottlenecks in the PSNP transfers to inform efforts by the humanitarian community to 
expedite the drought response.  
9. 
In response to these challenges, the Government aims to bring together the PSNP and HFA into 
a common framework, which sets out a single set of operational procedures that would be used by the 
PSNP and HFA from the selection of households for support to payments to monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E). As part of this framework, (i) the responsibility of and accountability for food management of the 
                                                          
5 This approach envisaged that the PSNP provides support to a ‘core caseload’ of chronically food insecure households and then 
scales up safety net support to households affected by drought through its contingency budgets held at the woreda and federal 
levels. When food needs are beyond the scope of the PSNP core caseload or contingency budgets, these are reflected in the 
Government’s humanitarian needs assessment and are financed through responses to a humanitarian appeal. 
0
5
10
15
20
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
Emergency
PSNP
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 123  
  
 
PSNP and HFA is consolidated; and (ii) the delivery of cash for HFA will be moved to MoFEC. Adopting 
these common procedures is an important step toward the envisioned scalable safety net in rural areas. 
10. 
Fulfilling the Government’s commitment to expanding access to safety nets necessitates higher 
levels of domestic financing. While safety net programs such as the PSNP have been almost exclusively 
donor funded,6 the Government has taken steps toward increasing domestic financing to these programs. 
In addition to an already significant in-kind contribution, in 2014 and 2015, the Government committed 
to making a cash contribution of US$285 million to the PSNP by 2020 and US$150 million to the UPSNP 
by 2021. These contributions are set within the goal of Government financing for the PSNP reaching an 
equivalent of 1 percent of GDP by 2025, which will fund most, if not all, of the annual program costs. In 
addition, in 2015 and 2016, the Government allocated US$735 million to the drought response to both 
PSNP and non-PSNP clients. Despite these positive steps, the PSNP faced a significant financing gap from 
2015–2020. To address this gap, the Government has allocated more funds to the PSNP and taken steps 
to reduce the scope of the program by (a) eliminating the annual allocation of US$50 million to the federal 
contingency budget; (b) reducing the transfer value; (c) scaling back the number of people to receive a 
livelihood grant, and (d) reducing the range of system-building activities to those that are core to the 
objective of the program.  
11. 
The social protection system in Ethiopia includes transformative elements as well as protective 
ones, building on the strong foundation of productive safety nets. The National Social Protection 
Strategy’s first two focus areas are ‘Promote productive safety nets’ and ‘Promote employment and 
improve livelihoods’. The PSNP and UPSNP are designed to deliver on these focus areas, with safety net 
transfers being provided in exchange for PW. Both programs also offer livelihood support to complement 
the provision of safety net support, with the aim of moving households sustainably out of poverty in the 
medium-term.  
Box 1. World Bank Support to the PSNP  
The World Bank’s support to the PSNP was initially through an Adaptable Program Lending (APL) instrument with 
three phases: APL I (P087707, 2005–2006, US$70 million, Implementation Completion and Results Report [ICR 
Report No ICR000008]: Satisfactory) supported the transition from the annual emergency appeal system based 
on food transfers to a multiannual predictable approach with the introduction of cash transfers and focused on 
testing and strengthening institutional arrangements and delivery systems; APL II (P098093, 2007–2009, US$175 
million, Additional Financing (AF) US$25 million, ICR Report No ICR00001676: Satisfactory) was a consolidation 
phase that strengthened technical capacity in all aspects of program implementation; and APL III (P113220, 2010–
2015, US$480 million, AF US$370 million, ICR Report No ICR00003659: Satisfactory) supported the program’s 
integration: consolidating performance and maximizing its long-term impacts on food security by ensuring 
effective integration and coordination with other critical interventions such as household asset building and risk 
financing mechanisms. Since 2015, the World Bank, through the Productive Safety Net Program 4 (PSNP 4, 
P146883, US$600 million, AF US$200 million), has been supporting the Government to shift toward a safety net 
system that has the ability to scale up in response to shocks such as drought. It is anticipated that the PSNP 4 will 
be fully disbursed by September 2017. 
 
                                                          
6 World Bank. 2016. “Social Protection Public Expenditure Review.” 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 123  
  
 
C. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes 
12. 
The proposed project has been designed to contribute directly to the development priorities of 
the Government of Ethiopia (GoE). GTP II (2015–2020) highlights the Government’s commitment to 
ensure food security and strengthen disaster risk management (DRM), which are elaborated in the social 
protection and DRM policies and strategies. The proposed project will support the Government’s aim of 
putting in place a safety net that scales up in response to shocks in rural areas. More specifically, the 
Government has set out higher-level objects for the PSNP that aim to improve food security and asset 
creation in rural areas while also contributing to efforts to transform the natural environment and 
improve nutrition. Key indicators that the Government is tracking are listed in Table 1. The proposed 
project will contribute toward realizing these objectives.  
Table 1. Key Indicators the Government Is Tracking 
Indicators 
Baseline 
Target (2020) 
Average number of months of household food insecurity  
2.5a 
2.0 
Average increase in crop productivity due to public works compared to 2010 (%) 
9.1 
14 
Percentage of households getting water from safe sources within 1 km (%) 
48.2 
55 
Note: a. 2016 baseline for highland regions. 
 
13. 
The proposed project contributes to an ongoing series of projects that support the realization of 
the Government’s DRM and the Social Protection Policies and Strategies. It also represents a key step 
toward realizing the Government’s vision of putting in place a scalable safety net program in rural areas. 
Instead of having two separate instruments to provide consumption smoothing support to food insecure 
populations, the Government aims to use the same instrument to provide predictable transfers to a core 
caseload of chronically food insecure households and to scale up cash and food transfers to transitorily 
affected populations in the event of a shock. Thus, the Government is currently considering how to 
consolidate the management of the PSNP and humanitarian food assistance. Central to this vision is the 
intention for the Government to finance from its own sources safety net support to the chronically food 
insecure population in rural areas by 2025, increase its financing for scaling up transfers to people during 
periods of crisis, and adopt other risk financing strategies to improve the predictability of financing for 
crisis response through national systems. To this end, the proposed project will be followed by a Program-
for-Results, which will further consolidate the rural safety net and support the Government to mainstream 
social protection and DRM more broadly. The Program-for-Results is proposed for FY21 (estimated IDA 
contribution US$600 million).  
14. 
This project is firmly aligned with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework FY18-
FY22 (CPF Report No. 115135-ET), particularly Focus Area Two: Building Resilience and Inclusiveness. By 
strengthening the effectiveness and scalability of the Government safety net system in rural areas, the 
proposed operation contributes most directly to the first objective under Focus Area Two: improved 
sustainability and effectiveness of safety nets. In addition, through the PW component, the proposed 
project also contributes to other objectives of Focus Area Two, particularly ‘early childhood nutrition and 
early learning outcomes’ and ‘enhanced management of natural resources and climate risks’. Achieving 
these other objectives involves continued and enhanced collaboration with other World Bank projects, 
particularly the Sustainable Land Management Project (P133133), Agricultural Growth Program 
(P113032), and the Pastoral Community Development Project (P075915). In addition, in aligning with the 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 123  
  
 
CPF, the proposed project contributes to the twin goals of the World Bank’s global strategy—reducing 
absolute poverty and promoting shared growth.

A. PDO 
15. 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support the Government of Ethiopia in improving 
the effectiveness and scalability of its rural safety net system.  
16. 
Improved effectiveness is defined as progress in the performance of the core aspects of a safety 
net that are central to achieving results, particularly selecting the correct people into the program, 
delivering transfers on time and in a predictable manner, and using robust payment systems to ensure 
that transfers reach the right people. Improved scalability refers to the expected benefits of consolidating 
the PSNP and HFA delivery systems and procedures into a single framework led by the Government. 
B. Project Beneficiaries 
17. 
The proposed project will target food insecure households in rural Ethiopia. The program will 
operate in eight regions: Afar, Amhara, Dire Dawa, Harari, Oromiya, Somali, Southern Nations, 
Nationalities, and Peoples (SNNP) Region, and Tigray. Direct program beneficiaries will include the 8 
million people targeted as core beneficiaries by the PSNP and beneficiaries of the HFA, the number for 
which will be determined through biannual needs assessments. Within the program, efforts are under 
way to ensure that male and female members of food insecure households benefit equally (Box 2).  
Box 2. Seeking to Promote Gender Equity through the PSNP  
The PSNP has had significant positive impacts on women and gender equity in Ethiopia. Under the program, 
Government has introduced maternity leave, flexible working hours, and equal pay for women and men in 
addition to childcare centers, to many communities for the first time—challenging cultural norms within the 
rural agricultural society in which the PSNP is implemented. Women’s participation in various local-level 
program implementation structures and their role in PW also helped develop self-esteem, which in turn led to 
earning more respect from their husbands at home. Women have also learned leadership skills, which has led 
some women to move into other kebele leadership structures. Women have reported that they are now more 
active in their communities. This is particularly valuable to women who were previously disconnected and had 
limited mobility in village life. The PSNP women interacted more with other women and learned how to take 
advantage of opportunities that were presented. Evidence from robust impact evaluations shows that the PSNP 
has positive impacts on the lives of women and girls. The PSNP has led to an increase in girls’ grade attainment 
between 6 percent and 14 percent (depending on the age of the child) and has improved schooling efficiency by 
10–20 percent. Participation in the PW of the PSNP lowers fertility, by reducing the likelihood that an adult 
female member in the PSNP households gives birth by 7.6–9.9 percentage points. At the same time, household 
size increased by 0.3 members, which arises from an increase in the number of girls ages 12–18. This finding 
suggests that the PSNP leads to a delay in marrying off adolescent girls. 
 
C. PDO-Level Results Indicators 
18. 
The key results for the proposed operation are the achievements that are most necessary to 
improve the effectiveness and scalability of the rural safety net system in Ethiopia. The effectiveness of 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 123  
  
 
the safety net can best be measured through progress in the accuracy of targeting, the timeliness of 
transfers, and the robustness of payment modalities. The scalability of the safety net can be measured 
through progress made in putting into practice the common framework for transfers that are delivered in 
response to drought and other shocks. Strengthening the performance of the rural safety net along these 
parameters is anticipated to improve the impacts on food security and contribute toward poverty 
reduction. The key results are as follows: 
• 
Timely transfers (Indicator name - % of core safety net transfers paid on time). This 
indicator assesses the extent to which clients receive their transfers on time, as set out in a 
payment calendar. There are separate indicators for core transfers and HFA transfers. This 
indicator focuses on the percentage of safety net payments meeting performance standards 
which, in the case of core transfers, vary between payments in cash or food.  
• 
Robust payment modalities, specifically for cash (Indicator name - # of PSNP core 
beneficiaries receiving their cash payments through e-payments). This result focuses on 
planned improvements to the payment systems for regular safety net transfers and those 
provided in response to drought. Specifically, it measures the expansion in the use of e-
payments for cash transfers.  
• 
Targeting accuracy (Indicator name - Percentage of households in the beneficiary list who 
are poor). This indicator will assess whether the safety net transfers are reaching eligible 
households. Targeting is largely effective at identifying chronically food insecure households 
in the highland regions for regular support from the PSNP. However, the targeting accuracy 
of the PSNP has been considerably weaker in pastoral regions (specifically Afar and Somali). 
Regarding the targeting of humanitarian food and cash resources, there is no robust 
evidence.  
• 
Integrated Public Works Planning (Indicator name - % of rural safety net public works sub-
projects meeting common standards). At present, planning of PW subprojects, which are 
funded through the PSNP or HFA, is carried out separately, with limited use of common 
standards. This indicator assesses the application of common standards including the 
percentage of rural safety net PW subprojects that have been screened using the GoE’s 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).

19. 
The proposed project will support the Government’s rural safety net, which brings together, into 
a common framework, the PSNP and the HFA. Through the PSNP, the Government provides predictable 
safety net support to 8 million chronically food insecure people in chronically food insecure woredas in 
rural Ethiopia. These people are selected into the program through a community-based targeting process. 
Households with able-bodied adult members are asked to work on community-planned PW in exchange 
for their transfers, which they receive each month for six months of the year. These adults participate in 
PW that rehabilitate the natural resource base, build health posts and schoolrooms, construct and 
rehabilitate roads, and build other public infrastructure as prioritized by the community. Women are 
exempt from PW during pregnancy and the first-year postpartum, during which they are linked with the 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 123  
  
 
Health Extension Program to receive antenatal counselling, growth monitoring, and other services. Labor-
constrained households7 receive unconditional transfers (PDS) and are linked with complementary social 
services where possible. Transfers are provided in cash or food through the Government’s financial 
management (FM) and food management systems and, in some cases, through the World Food 
Programme (WFP) and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs).8 The PSNP also provides livelihoods 
support in the form of skills training, business planning, savings promotion, credit facilitation, and, where 
appropriate, employment linkages. For the poorest PSNP households that have completed the required 
trainings, the program also offers a livelihood transfer for the purchase of productive assets.  
20. 
The HFA provides food and cash transfers to households that are food insecure because of a 
shock, most often drought, in rural areas. The number of people supported by the HFA (and the duration 
of this support) is determined though a biannual needs assessment.9 The households are selected into 
the HFA through a community-based targeting process. Historically, the HFA provided only food transfers 
to households; increasingly, however, support is being provided in cash. While the needs assessment will 
recommend that households receive transfers each month for three to twelve months, the actual amount 
of support depends on the amount of funds allocated in response to the humanitarian appeal. Transfers 
are provided unconditionally, although in some areas, households are encouraged to participate in PW. 
Transfers in food are provided through the Government’s food management systems and through the 
WFP and NGOs. Transfers in cash have been through the NDRMC. 
21. 
The PSNP was designed so that safety net support can be expanded in response to drought. The 
program has the flexibility to provide extended months of support to existing clients and include 
additional households as temporary clients. To date, this scalin

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

tors led to insufficient financing for the PSNP from 2015–2020 (Annex 1). 
In response, the Government has modified the parameters of the PSNP to reduce its scope and ambition, 
with a resulting decrease in the annual budget from July 2017 to July 2020. These changes are described 
in the components in the following paragraphs. Should more financing become available, the Government 
would (a) increase the transfer value and (b) increase coverage to new people and areas. If less financing 
is available, the duration of support and then the number of people will be reduced. 
A. Project Components 
23. 
To support the Government to improve the delivery of an effective and scalable safety net, this 
project will include three components. 
24. 
Component 1: Safety net transfers for food insecure households in rural areas (US$1,592 million 
equivalent, of which US$515 million equivalent is from the IDA grant) finances safety net transfers to 
selected households that participate in labor-intensive PW, through which community assets are created 
and access to mainstream health and nutrition services is facilitated.  
25. 
This component is focused on the delivery of predictable and timely transfers (both regular 
transfers to core clients and transfers to households in response to shocks). It comprises the PW that most 
clients work on in exchange for their safety net transfers and the nutrition-sensitive interventions that 
supplement these PW conditions. It supports chronically food insecure households, which make up the 
core of the PSNP, through manual cash payments, cash e-payments, and food transfers. Households are 
selected to participate in the program through a community-based targeting process to identify those 
who are chronically food insecure. These households reside in chronically food insecure woredas. 
Households with able-bodied adult members receive safety net transfers in exchange for work carried out 
on PW subprojects. They receive transfers each month for six months. The most vulnerable households, 
which are those with members who are elderly or disabled and lack any able-bodied adults or female-
headed households with high dependency ratios, will receive direct transfers each month throughout the 
year. 
26. 
From July 2017, the value of the transfers (per person per month) will be indexed to the price of 
15 kg of wheat in local markets at the point in the year when prices are highest (that is, the hungry 
period).10 The value of the cash transfer provided to chronically food insecure households is regularly 
reviewed and revised based on the analysis of annual wage rate studies. Market studies will be introduced 
to understand better where and when cash can most appropriately be used. The methodology for these 
studies will be agreed with humanitarian stakeholders and will be the basis for determining the use of 
cash or food for ‘normal’ periods and to respond to severe droughts. 
27. 
Transfers will be scheduled for delivery during or immediately before the period when households 
experience the greatest difficulty in meeting their food needs. As the seasonality of food insecurity varies 
across areas, the transfer schedule will also vary across regions. Specifically, pastoral areas are expected 
to follow a different transfer schedule than the crop dependent areas, around which the current transfer 
                                                          
10 Thereby reducing the value of the transfer from the current value, which is equivalent to 15 kg of wheat and 4 kg of pulses 
per person per month, as explained further in Annex 1. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438) 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 123  
  
 
schedule is set. Households largely receive cash transfers according to the transfer schedule (the payment 
calendar that sets out by which transfers should be paid to households). Support, close supervision, and 
improved oversight of the food management process will help ensure improvements in timely delivery of 
food transfers. 
28. 
This component also supports the provision of safety net transfers in response to shocks, through 
the woredas’ contingency budgets and through investments in the common framework that would then 
be used when funding is allocated to the federal contingency budget of the PSNP or from humanitarian 
sources. For the first time, under the rural safety net, the Government’s seasonal assessment will identify 
the negative effects of drought on households and specifically the extent of food needs arising from 
drought among the PSNP clients and non-PSNP households. At woreda and sub-woreda levels, the 
targeting of and payment systems for safety net transfers in response to transitory food insecurity 
(whether financed through the PSNP contingency or humanitarian funding) will follow the same 
procedures as the procedures for core transfers: households will be selected through a community-based 
targeting process and payments will be made in cash or food through manual or e-payment modalities. 
The value of the transfers provided in response to drought will be indexed to the Sphere standards (this 
includes an increase to transfers provided to chronically food insecure households in drought-affected 
areas).11  
29. 
The PSNP PW subprojects are planned and carried out in a manner that supports the creation of 
sustainable community assets and an improved enabling environment for livelihoods. The PW subprojects 
are selected through the watershed planning approach, which is based on the Government’s Community-
Based Participatory Watershed Management Guidelines. Community-led labor-intensive PW activities, 
funded through the PSNP or HFA, that are carried out in exchange for safety net transfers will feature in 
a single plan, which will be integrated into the woreda development plans and reflect community 
development priorities that improve the management of disaster risks as outlined in the woreda risk 
profiles. This approach will also enable the use of standard safeguard procedures, which will be applied 
to all PW subprojects on which people work in exchange for safety net transfers. These PW subprojects 
will be financed through the safety net transfers to households that work on the subprojects and the 
capital budgets, which fund the capital and skilled labor requirements for PW. Technical oversight and 
support by front-line staff, together with dedicated monitoring and evaluation, aims to improve the 
quality of the assets that are created. Beyond providing labor for PW subprojects, safety net clients are 
encouraged to engage in community-based nutrition and antenatal care services, which are primarily 
targeted to children under two years old and pregnant and lactating mothers.12 In severe drought years, 
PW conditions will be waived for all households receiving safety net support, whether funded through the 
PSNP or HFA. A tool will be developed to identify when the exemption from PW will be applied based on 
the government’s early warning system. Until this system is in place, an existing NDRMC method for 
classifying woredas by their nutrition hotspot status will be used, with PWs waived in ‘hotspot priority 
one woredas’. 
30. 
Pastoral regions. Implementation capacity has lagged in the pastoral regions of Afar and Somali, 
and, despite some recent improvements (particularly in Somali region), there is a need to fast-track 
                                                          
11 The Sphere standards set out the minimum nutrient requirement (2,100 kcal, including specific amounts of protein, fats, and 
micronutrients) for a general food ration that is provided in an emergency setting.  
12 In some areas, public works may also be carried-out in exchange for participation in financial literacy. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438) 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 123  
  
 
progress. The key areas where progress is needed are (a) targeting of households; (b) timeliness and 
predictability of payments; (c) implementation of social and environmental safeguards; and (e) financial 
and food management. The level of progress, and the needs, of the two pastoral regions differ and support 
will be tailored accordingly. Recent progress in Somali region will be sustained and accelerated through 
enhanced oversight and support beyond the existing M&E system of the PSNP. MoFEC, with the support 
of development partners (DPs), will undertake quarterly FM supervision missions to improve FM in the 
region, while externally contracted ‘spot-checks’, which will be carried out six-monthly (quarterly in Afar 
and Somali) in a random sample of woredas, will regularly assess progress in the proper implementation 
of targeting, the use of safeguards, PW, and payments. The limited observable progress in Afar requires a 
more significant change in approach. In addition to the enhanced oversight, there is a need to consider 
modifying the design of the PSNP and supplementing Government capacity for program delivery. The 
possibility of contracting additional technical assistance (through NGOs or other service providers) to 
provide intensive and hands-on support for the establishment and functioning of key systems and 
procedures at woreda and kebele levels will be explored during implementation. The 2018 independent 
evaluation of the PSNP will provide the basis for decisions regarding possible modifications to the design 
of the program in these areas.  
31. 
Component 2: Enhanced access to complementary livelihood services (US$53 million equivalent, 
of which US$17 million equivalent is from the IDA grant). This component will support the livelihood 
interventions that are currently carried out under the PSNP for chronically food insecure households. In 
response to shortfalls in financing and lessons learned over the past two years, the Government’s aim of 
providing livelihood transfers to 30 percent of the PSNP clients will be scaled down to an aim of reaching 
10 percent of the PSNP clients. Efforts are under way to bring the livelihood support to the PSNP clients 
that is provided through NGOs into the framework of the PSNP livelihood component to enable better 
coordination, complementarity, and learning. The livelihood component at woreda level (including the 
livelihood transfer) will not roll out to Somali and Afar until the evaluations show improvements in the 
performance of the safety net transfers. This component consists of two elements: (a) tailored support to 
core the PSNP clients, including on-farm extension, mentoring and coaching in business and technical skills 
training for diversification into off-farm activities, links to employment services, voluntary savings 
promotion, and referring households to micro-level financial institutions.13 The Government has allocated 
US$33 million over the past two years to microfinancing institutions to be allocated as loans to the PSNP 
households; (b) the continuation of the Government’s work to explore the provision of livelihood transfers 
(grants) to give the most vulnerable households a boost to enable them to build productive assets, 
develop their livelihoods, access credit, and, ultimately, become self-sufficient by testing the use of these 
transfers in eight woredas. This exploratory work will continue under this operation in the form of a pilot, 
which will rigorously assess whether the livelihood component, including the livelihood transfer, 
generates results.  
32. 
Component 3: Institutional support to strengthen systems for the rural productive safety net 
(US$210 million equivalent, of which US$68 million is from the IDA grant). This component will support 
activities to strengthen the Government’s institutions, human resources, and systems to enable (a) the 
effective targeting of safety net resources to both chronically and transitorily food insecure households; 
(b) the timely delivery of predictable safety net support in the form of cash or food; (c) scaling-up of safety 
net support in response to drought to eligible households; (d) interventions to increase the productive 
                                                          
13 The PSNP supports linking of clients to microfinance institutions (MFIs) but does not directly deliver credit to clients. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438) 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 123  
  
 
nature of the program, specifically the quality of the PW and delivery of livelihood support; (e) the 
existence of an effective system for managing complaints (grievance redress) and processes to hear 
feedback from beneficiary communities (social accountability); and (f) robust M&E of these systems and 
the impacts of this support on households and communities.  
33. 
As the safety net is largely delivered through Government systems, this component aims to enable 
the more effective use of these human and physical resources of the Government. This includes financing 
(a) the woreda administration and program management budgets at federal and regional levels, which 
are used to support the annual planning of program activities, technical support to lower-level 
implementers, monitoring, training, and follow-up; (b) the capacity-building budget lines of the program, 
which include training for staff, particularly at regional and woredas levels, and activities to support 
mentoring and coaching, among other capacity-building activities;14 and (c) the activities (including 
consultancy services and hardware) to strengthen the administrative systems of the rural safety net, 
including (i) putting in place a program-based management information system (MIS); (ii) improving PASS 
to track payments in cash and food for core clients and those receiving temporary support in response to 
drought and to begin to create a household registry of safety net clients; and (iii) strengthening the 
Government’s early warning systems15 to better inform a scaling-up of the safety net. A central focus of 
this component will be to strengthen the Government’s FM systems for cash transfers, food management 
system for safety net transfers in the form of food, and systems of making electronic payments to clients.  
B. Project Cost and Financing 
34. 
The World Bank will use Investment Project Financing (IPF) for this operation. A Program-for-
Results instrument was considered but MoFEC opted for an IPF because the Government did not have in 
place the medium-term financing framework (MTFF) that is required for a Program-for-Results. An AF was 
also considered, but a new operation provided a greater opportunity to consider the linkages between 
the PSNP and HFA. MoFEC and the World Bank agreed that the next phase of support to the Government’s 
rural safety net would be through a Program-for-Results. In preparation for this, the Government will 
develop an MTFF that adequately reflects safety nets expenditure and financing until 2025.  
35. 
The total budget of the Government’s PSNP is US$1.86 billion for the period from July 2017 to July 
2020, toward which IDA will allocate US$600 million in grant terms. The program will be financed by the 
Government and 10 DPs, including the World Bank. These partners are the Canadian Government, Danish 
International Development Assistance (DANIDA), Embassy of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, European 
Union, Government of Ireland, DFID, United Nation’s Children Fund, USAID, and the WFP.  
36. 
The total cost of the program and by component is provided in Table 2. The budget does not 
include the estimated cost of funding the scaling-up of the program in response to drought, as this will be 
determined annually through the seasonal assessment. The total value of the Government contribution 
to the PSNP is estimated at approximately US$733 million, of which US$622 million will be provided as a 
cash contribution16. The remaining amount (estimated to be US$111 million) reflects the Government’s 
                                                          
14 The Canadian Government, with support from U.K. Department for International Development (DFID), is financing the 
provision of technical assistance to strengthen the approach to capacity building in the PSNP.  
15 In line with the Disaster Risk Management Sector Programme Investment Framework. 
16 The Government has guaranteed that the PSNP will be fully funded over the coming three years and, as such, has committed 
to increasing its allocation beyond the US$285 million it had originally committed, as described in paragraph 10. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Rural Productive Safety Net Project (P163438) 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 123  
  
 
financing of operational costs, which include the salaries of civil servants working on the program at 
federal and woreda levels and the cost of office space, among other operating expenses.  
Table 2. Project Budget Per Year by Component (in US$, million) 
Project Components 
2017/18 
Budget 
2018/19 
Budget 
2019/20 
Budget 
Total 
2017/20 
Safety net transfers for food insecure households in rural areas 
585.3 
503.5 
503.4 
1,592.2 
Enhanced access to complementary livelihood services 
14.1 
18.2 
21.0 
53.3 
Institutional support to strengthening systems for the rural 
safety net 
96.6 
61.3 
52.6 
210.5 
Annual budget 
696.0 
583.0 
577.0 
1,856.0 
Annual budget, with Government’s operational expenditures  
738.0 
618.0 
612.0 
1,968.0 
37. 
When it was launched in 2015, the PSNP faced a significant financing gap from 2015 to 2020. The 
Government has taken concerted steps to respond to this gap by (a) more than doubling its cash 
contribution to the PSNP for 2016/17 and 2017/18; (b) asking DPs to front-load funding during this same 
period; and (c) most recently, reducing the budget of the PSNP for the remaining three years. These 
reductions include (a) eliminating the annual allocation of US$50 million to the federal contingency 
budget; (b) reducing the transfer value; (c) scaling back the number of people to receive a livelihood grant; 
and (d) reducing range of system-building activities to those that are core to the objective of the program.  
Table 3. Financing of the Rural Safety Net (in US$, million) 
 
2017/18 
2018/19 
2019/20 
TOTAL 
Annual budget 
696 
583 
577 
1,856 
Source of financing 
 
 
 
 
IDA 
343a 
200 
147 
690 
Other DP Financing (see datasheet for details) 
202 
157 
186 
545 
Government financing17 
151 
226 
244 
621 
Note: a. Includes US$90 million from the PSNP 4 allocated in the first quarter of FY2017/18. 
38. 
To realize the objective of integrating the rural safety net into the Government’s national 
budgeting and planning process, MoANR will include in its annual budget submission to MoFEC the full 
costs of the PSNP (both cash and food), confirmed levels of financing from DPs (including IDA), and the 
required amount for the Government to allocate to ensure that the program is fully financed for the fiscal 
year. This process will be completed well in advance of each fiscal year to ensure predictable financing to 
the PSNP, which is central to achieve its objectives, and will not include any changes to the core design 
parameters or a reduction in the transfer value. 
C. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
39. 
The project design reflects lessons that have been learned from the implementation of the PSNP, 
since its launch in 2005, and the significant body of evidence that has been generated through the rigorous 
                                                          
17 Government financing reflects the guarantee of MoFEC that the PSNP will be full funded over the coming three years. This 
source of financing includes: (i) an allocation from Treasury of US$100 million in 2017/18; US$77.3 million in 2018/19; US$106.0 
million in 2019/20; and (ii) other sources, including raising funds from development partners.