[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 51485 chars (26.5% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
 
1. 
Ethiopia is a large and diverse country. It is located in the Horn of Africa and is land-
locked with an area of 1.1 million square kilometers—about the size of France and Spain 
combined. Ethiopia’s biophysical environment includes a variety of contrasting ecosystems, with 
significant differences in climate, soil properties, vegetation types, agricultural potential, 
biodiversity, and water resources. Ethiopia is a country of many nations, nationalities, and 
people, with a total population of 91.7 million (2012).1 Only 17 percent of the population lives in 
urban centers, with the great majority of them living in Addis Ababa. At a current annual growth 
rate of 2.6 percent, Ethiopia’s population is estimated to reach 130 million by 2025, and is 
projected by the United Nations (UN) to be among the world’s top 10 by 2050. Ethiopia is 
vulnerable to terms of trade shocks from international food and fuel prices, and to large domestic 
weather-related shocks, as the 2011/12 East Africa drought demonstrated. 
 
2. 
Ethiopia has experienced strong economic growth over the past decade. Economic 
growth averaged 10.7 percent per year in 2003/04 to 2011/12, compared with the regional 
average of 5.4 percent. This growth reflected a mix of factors, including agricultural 
modernization, the development of new export sectors, strong global commodity demand, and 
government-led development investments. Private consumption and public investment have 
driven demand-side growth, with the latter assuming an increasingly important role in recent 
years. On the supply side, growth was driven by an expansion of the services and agricultural 
sectors, while the role of the industrial sector was relatively modest. More recently, annual 
growth rates have declined slightly, but still remain at high single-digit levels. Growth in the 
export of goods has also moderated in recent years, and a decline was observed in 2012/13 for 
the first time since 2008/09. There have been bouts of high inflation in recent years and, while 
inflation is currently much lower, keeping it down remains a major objective for monetary 
policy. 
 
3. 
Ethiopia is one of the world's poorest countries, but has made substantial progress 
on social and human development over the past decade. The country’s per capita income of 
US$370 is substantially lower than the regional average of US$1,257, and is among the 10 
lowest worldwide.2 Ethiopia is ranked 173 out of 187 countries in the Human Development 
Index (HDI) of the United Nations Development Programme. However, high economic growth 
has helped reduce poverty, in both urban and rural areas. Since 2005, 2.5 million people have 
been lifted out of poverty, and the share of the population below the poverty line has fallen from 
38.7 percent in 2004/05 to 29.6 percent in 2010/11 (using a poverty line of close to 
US$1.25/day). However, because of high population growth, the absolute number of poor people 
(about 25 million) has remained unchanged over the past 15 years. Ethiopia is among the 
countries that have made the fastest progress on the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 
and HDI ranking over the past decade. It is on track to achieve the MDGs related to gender 
                                                          
1 Source: United Nations. According to the Ethiopian Central Statistics Office, the population figure is 82.6 million. 
2 Gross National Income, World Bank Atlas Method. 
2 
 
parity in education, child mortality, HIV/AIDS, and malaria. Ethiopia has achieved substantial 
progress in universal primary education, although it may not meet the MDG target. The 
reduction of maternal mortality remains a challenge. 
 
4. 
The Government of Ethiopia is currently implementing an ambitious Growth and 
Transformation Plan (GTP) 2010/11–2014/15, which sets a long-term goal of becoming a 
middle-income country by 2023, with growth rates of at least 11.2 percent per annum during the 
plan period. To achieve the GTP goals and objectives, the Government of Ethiopia (GoE) has 
followed a “developmental state” model with a strong role for the government in many aspects 
of the economy. It has prioritized key sectors, such as industry and agriculture, as drivers of 
sustained economic growth and job creation. The GTP reaffirms the GoE’s commitment to 
human development. Development partners have programs that are broadly aligned with the 
GTP priorities. 
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
5. 
The use of statistical information for economic management in Ethiopia started in 
the 1960s. In 1963 the Central Statistical Office (CSO) was founded with a mandate of 
conducting regular statistical activities. The CSO reported to the Ministry of Planning and 
Development, and later to the Planning Commission until 1989, with some reorganization in 
between. In 1989, it was restructured to become the Central Statistical Authority, which was 
initially accountable to the Council of Ministers and later to the Ministry of Economic 
Development and Cooperation (MEDAC), then to the Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Development (MOFED)3 The current statistical law passed on 20 April 2005 (Proclamation No 
442/205) reestablished the CSA as an autonomous Federal agency reporting to MOFED.  
6. 
The National Statistical Development Strategy (NSDS) for Ethiopia covers the 
period from 2009/10 to 2013/14. It succeeds the Medium Term Statistical Programme (MTSP) 
for the CSA that ended in 2008, but it differs in scope. The NSDS covers statistical development 
in the entire National Statistical System (NSS). The NSDS, developed through a participatory 
process, has six interconnected strategic themes: (i) implementation of the statistics law, which 
mainly pertains to the coordination of the NSS and establishment of appropriate organizational 
units and standards; (ii) development of data quality procedures, which corresponds to the 
development of data quality assessment framework (DQAF), coordinated by the CSA for the 
NSS; (iii) enhancement of advocacy and use of statistics through promotion of a common 
website for the NSS, and training of stakeholders; (iv) methodological improvements and 
statistical modernization, which relates to identification and filling of data gaps and reduction of 
duplication of surveys; (v) Capacity development in the NSS to meet the increased demand for 
statistics, which involves investments that improve organizational arrangements, enhance 
training and availability of skilled staff, encourage staff retention and reduce turnover, leverage 
ICT for quick data capture and dissemination, provide additional space, furniture and appropriate 
facilities for a conducive work environment and efficient operations; and (vi) relating the NSDS 
to the Monitoring and Evaluation of PASDEP and other interventions such as MDGs. 
                                                          
3  Formerly Ministry of Economic Development and Cooperation (MEDAC) before September 2001.  
3 
 
7. 
The CSA has two objectives: (i) to plan, collect, process, and disseminate statistical data 
and (ii) to lead national coordination and provide technical guidance and assistance to 
government agencies and institutions in building administrative systems and registers (see Figure 
1). It is the principal collector, aggregator and disseminator of official statistics and the 
coordinator of the National Statistical System (NSS)4. The CSA has a staff of almost 2500, of 
which approximately 50 are managers, 380 are statisticians, 400 are technical and administrative 
professionals, 1400 are support staff, and 250 logistical staff. Its annual budget (both capital and 
recurrent) is about US$10 million, of which about 30 percent is for staff salaries and the rest for 
surveys and operations (2012). This funding model of the CSA differs favorably from many 
other statistical offices in Africa that usually fund staff salaries but do not provide budget for 
conducting surveys. In view of government ownership and funding CSA has conducted a number 
of surveys and censuses in the last few years. The CSA has also collaborated with national 
government agencies and international development partners to build Ethiopia’s statistical 
infrastructure. 
Figure 1: Institutional Framework: CSA’s Current Mandate in Statistical Development 
• ….plan, collect, produce and 
disseminate statistics…
Internal
Since   its
creation
• …lead national coordination.. 
and assist institutions…
External
Since 
2005
 
8. 
The CSA’s 25 branch offices enhance data quality by ensuring the Agency’s 
presence close to the enumeration areas. The branches allow easier provision of routine 
supervision, and speedy resolution of field-level issues. This decentralized presence also 
facilitates deployment of resident enumerators who update sampling frames and conduct 
interviews at the convenience of the respondent.  
 
 
 
                                                          
4  The National Strategy for the Development of Statistics lists federal and regional government ministries departments and 
agencies as well as research and teaching institutions and civil society organizations as NSS members. 
4 
 
Figure 2: International Comparison of NSOs Size 
 
Source: Various Statistical Agencies 
9. 
The CSA is the leading organization in the NSS, with 25 branch offices and 72 percent 
of its staff in the field. However, the NSS faces several institutional weaknesses and 
organizational challenges. These were broadly identified in the National Strategy for 
Development of Statistics (NSDS) and are summarized in three categories as follows (See Annex 
6 for details):  
 Weak institutional capacity within CSA and statistics-producing Government 
ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs) to execute planned surveys, carry out in-
depth analysis, regularly assess user needs, and disseminate statistical products and 
services. Management of resources is also deficient, physical and IT infrastructure is sub-
optimal, and staff salaries are low while statistical staff turnover is high. In light of the 
fast expanding demand for statistics, CSA’s organization may have to be right-sized (e.g. 
expanded by increasing the number of permanent statisticians). International comparisons 
of NSOs size indicate that Ethiopia compares unfavorably with large federal states e.g. 
Turkey and South Africa (i.e., 3.4 staff per 100,000 populations as opposed to 4.7 and 
5.7, respectively) (see Figure 25). 
 Data gaps due to incomplete sampling frames in some sectors, such as business statistics; 
lack of data for some sectors such as mining, energy, construction and transport sectors; 
                                                          
5  Based on various sources and mission findings: Cambodia-National Statistics System Annual Report 2010; Ethiopia Central 
Statistical Agency 2013; Kenya-KNBS Strategic Plan 2008-2012. Page 11; South Korea-Overview of KOSTAT (UNStat); 
Malaysia.- Country Assessment Report. 2011. Agriculture Statistics System. Page 7. Working Draft; Rwanda-National 
Institute for Statistics 2013; Senegal -Rapport Annuel d’activites 2010. Page 40; South Africa-Annual Report.  2011/2012. 
Page 167; Tanzania-Annual Report. 2010/11. Statistical Master Plan. Page 20; Turkey-Strategic Plan 2012-2016. Page 51; 
Uganda-Sector Strategic Plan for Statistics. 2007-2012. Page 7. It is important to note that cross country comparisons need to 
be interpreted with caution as  NSO mandates, functions and settings vary across countries. For example, some NSOs handle 
“national accounts” (e.g. Rwanda) while others do not (e.g. Ethiopia) making comparisons difficult. Also, some NSOs use ICT 
while others handle all the data collection process manually. International comparisons are also affected by  basic information 
gaps, especially on operational and human resource areas. 
0.79 
0.98 
1.13 
1.2 
1.7 
2.3 
3.4 
4.7 
5.7 
9.3 
11.34 
No. of Staff per 100,000 population
5 
 
little, or no, time series data in some areas to maintain consistency in results from year to 
year; and lack of timeliness of data coming from some of the existing surveys. 
 Coordination problems, as manifested by the lack of  a single database for statistics 
produced by the ministries, which result in the duplication of efforts and contradictory 
estimates from data producers on similar variables.  
10. 
The CSA and key MDAs need to improve their ability to produce timely and 
reliable statistics, and build public trust in official statistics. In particular, the CSA needs to 
establish itself as a leading producer, and provider, of cost-effective, timely and quality statistics. 
There is also a need to strengthen the CSA’s physical and statistical capacity to carry out its 
mission as the principal collector, aggregator and disseminator of statistics and the coordinator of 
the NSS.  
11. 
 The NSDS proposes investments in data development, human capacity and physical 
and transport infrastructure and logistics. However, while the design of the NSDS is 
satisfactory in identifying challenges, it is weak on implementation. The World Bank and the 
CSA identified the following 5 implementation priority areas that need institutional 
strengthening6 (see Annex 6 for details): 
 Organizational and infrastructure development 
 Data development and management 
 Methodological research and analysis 
 Dissemination and statistical advocacy 
 Monitoring and evaluation 
 
12. 
The GTP identifies sectoral targets and strategies to enhance economic growth and 
achieve medium and long term objectives. The development strategy has also highlighted the 
importance of data to track and monitor achievements of targets underlined in the Plan. The 
Government of Ethiopia has committed itself to an agenda of results that require clear and 
systematic measurement, monitoring, and evaluation of the achievement of outputs, outcomes, 
and the impact of development policies and plan targets. Ethiopia’s national statistical system 
(NSS) is charged with the responsibility of providing the information required to measure, 
monitor and evaluate the development process. Data on various sectors of the economy are also 
required to inform private sector investment decisions. In addition, the recent expansion in 
higher learning institutions and graduate programs in the country will further increase the 
demand for quality data and thereby increased the need for official statistical information. 
C.  Rational for Bank Involvement  
13. 
The proposed project is consistent with the Ethiopia Country Partnership Strategy 
(CPS, Report no.71884-ET) which was discussed by the Executive Directors on September 
                                                          
6  These five areas represent the most urgent and immediate priorities of the unfunded NSDS priorities (identified in the mid-
term review of the NSDS); it is envisaged that the SFR Project and the establishment of the National Partnership Group (NPG) 
for Ethiopia would be able to trigger additional funding from government and development partners alike. 
6 
 
25, 2012. The strategy for Ethiopia notes the importance of strengthening the statistical capacity 
of the CSA to produce data in order to measure the impacts of its interventions.  
14. 
The project will also allow the CSA and the World Bank to further strengthen 
ongoing collaborative surveys. The Bank has already made investments in the CSA at different 
times over the last few years. The World Bank has directly partnered with the CSA to implement 
surveys and statistical capacity building activities. For example, recently completed and on-
going collaborations between the World Bank and the CSA include the following: Rural 
Investment Climate Survey, Productive Safety Net Program, Protection of Basic Services, and 
Ethiopia Rural Socioeconomic Survey. In addition, the World Bank has assisted the CSA 
through other government agencies and international research organizations to help implement 
large surveys such as the Welfare Monitoring Survey, the Sustainable Land Management Survey, 
and the survey component of the Agricultural Growth Program.  
15. 
The World Bank’s support to statistical capacity-building in Ethiopia follows the 
principles of the Statistics for Results Facility Catalytic Fund (SRF-CF). The SRF-CF seeks 
to guide the support programs through a National Partnership Group (NPG) and to base 
statistical capacity building on the priorities identified in the NSDS. In fact, the SRF is aiming to 
close some of the funding gaps currently in the NSDS implementation plan, address capacity 
gaps highlighted by the NSDS, and leverage additional financing through partners to meet CSA 
needs. The World Bank also encourages the government, where possible, to use some of its IDA 
credits towards this statistical purpose. This is of particular importance to ensure long-term 
sustainability in the National Statistical System.  
D. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes 
16. 
Achieving the goals of the GOE’s Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP) and the 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), and facilitating the Post-2015 MDG Agenda 
Setting will be supported. Improvements in the quality, relevance and timeliness of priority 
statistics will contribute to more effective development policy by: (1) providing the basis for 
monitoring and evaluating the Government’s GTP7 and for tracking the progress of MDGs, and 
(2) by providing feedback to policy-makers and citizens on the effectiveness of public policy and 
the use of public resources. It will also help policy makers in preparing reports that can facilitate 
post-2015 MDG agenda planning. The proposed Statistics for Results (SFR) project is closely 
related to the goals outlined in the 2013-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) of Ethiopia.  It 
is designed to support the NSDS, which is expected to provide the relevant indicators to be used 
in formulating, updating, monitoring and evaluating the strategies and targets of the country’s 
social and economic development programs. The CPS Result Framework is aligned to the GTP 
framework. Thus, strengthening the national statistical system would greatly improve the 
indicators and data used for monitoring performance under both this framework and the CPS.  
17. 
Furthermore, the proposed operation will directly support the objectives of 
improving governance and public sector capacity in Ethiopia, which forms the foundation 
of the World Bank Africa Regional Strategy (2011). It is expected that enabling appropriate 
                                                          
7  GTP sets out the country’s objectives, priorities and major policies to be implemented during 2009-2014. 
7 
 
data to be readily available and accessible to users will improve governance. The Ethiopia SFR 
project is also designed to support the capacity building efforts of the CSA and other related 
National Statistical System agencies at the federal and regional levels (e.g. training in statistical 
systems). Given the fundamental nature of statistics in the economy, the Project will indirectly 
contribute to the two pillars of the World Bank Africa Regional Strategy: competitiveness and 
resilience. It will contribute to competitiveness via trade data and data obtained from business 
enterprise-based censuses/surveys; and to resilience through statistics obtained from household-
based censuses/surveys and from pilot vital statistics development programs. 
18. 
Supporting World Bank Goals of Reducing Extreme Poverty and Promoting Shared 
Prosperity, and Fulfilling IDA Priorities would be the main areas of the project’s focus.. 
Support for the improvement of national statistical capacity and data quality in Ethiopia is 
consistent with the focus on measureable results in the recently-approved World Bank goals 
(May 2013): (a) end extreme poverty: decreasing the percentage of people living with less than 
$1.25 a day to no more than 3 percent globally by 2030; and (b) promote shared prosperity: 
foster the income growth of the bottom 40 percent of the population in every country. Also, 
support for statistical capacity development is consistent with the focus on results measurement, 
as agreed during the IDA15 and IDA16 replenishments and already highlighted as a key element 
of IDA17 programs. Specifically, the negotiations for the IDA15 and IDA16 replenishments 
emphasized the importance of management for development results and the central role that 
national statistical systems have in this process, and therefore encouraged IDA to support client 
countries in its efforts to improve results-based management. The IDA17 seeks to support the 
post-2015 MDG agenda, among other programs. In addition, the Bank’s support to the NSDS 
program is also in line with the Statistics for Results Facility Catalytic Fund (SRF-CF) that aims 
to provide support to developing countries—such as Ethiopia —to help them improve their 
statistical capacity. Ethiopia met all of the Statistics for Results Facility Catalytic Fund (SRF-CF) 
requirements. The SRF Council approved Ethiopia’s application on January 11, 2013. 
19. 
Institutional readiness and evidence-based decision-making culture would be 
promoted by the proposed project. The program will improve the data needed to support an 
evidence-based planning and decision-making culture. When data are uncertain or unreliable, or 
when users lack confidence in the institutions that produce them, decision-makers tend to base 
decisions on their assumptions about the world and the prevailing ideology. This creates an 
environment where strategies and plans are devised and implemented without attention to 
empirical evidence and with weak monitoring and evaluation practices. This in turn further 
emphasizes the importance of promoting of demand for data by providing users with relevant, 
reliable and timely data, and the tools to interpret them. The project will focus on making 
statistical data easier to find and use, and to equip both public and private users with the 
necessary tools for basing decisions on facts.  
20. 
 Strengthening governance and accountability will improve outcomes. Reliable, 
relevant and freely-accessible information is an important building block of an open and 
democratic society with a transparent and accountable government. The project will improve the 
relevance, timeliness and reliability of data, and strengthen the analysis and use of statistics by 
increasing awareness, improving engagement with public and private data users, and 
8 
 
strengthening the analytical and dissemination capacities of statistical service providers. The 
project will also support implementation of the GOE’s ICT initiatives.

A. Project Development Objective (PDO) 
21. 
The objective of the proposed project is to enhance the capacity of the Central Statistical 
Agency (CSA) at the organizational, human, and physical levels in order to produce and 
disseminate reliable, accessible, and timely statistics. This will be achieved through 
modernization of the CSA’s organizational and data development capabilities and infrastructure 
at headquarters and select branch offices, as well as through improvement of the data 
management capabilities of key Ministries, Departments, and Agencies (MDAs) in the National 
Statistical System (NSS). The target users and beneficiaries of the project would be both the 
government and the general public and stakeholders. 
B. Project Beneficiaries 
22. 
The World Bank Project will support part of the overall GOE program: The NSDS, 
including modernization of the CSA. Key producers and users of statistics in National 
Statistical System (NSS) of Ethiopia are the main beneficiaries. They include: (i) the Central 
Statistical Agency (CSA); (ii) the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MOFED) 
and select Ministries Departments and Agencies (MDAs), Regional Governments and City 
Administration Authorities; (iii) Parliament (iv) judicial branch authorities; (v) policy makers 
and planners in the public and private sectors, including civil society organizations; (vi) 
researchers, associations and academia; (vii) international, regional, and global organizations and 
entities; and (viii) members of the general public, who will also benefit from better and faster 
access to information.  
C. PDO Level Results Indicators 
23. 
The project development objective will be assessed by the quality and timeliness of 
statistical products and services produced by the Central Statistical Agency (CSA). The 
main outcomes will be improvements in the availability and reliability of statistical information 
for effective policymaking, good governance, and the design and monitoring of programs and 
policies. This will be measured by the following results indicators 8: 
(i) 
Reliability and Quality: The CSA applies internationally-accepted statistical techniques 
and ICT applications in the collection, compilation and authenticity verification of data, 
and validates data sources and statistical products in select Ministries, Departments and 
Agencies (MDAs). 
(ii) 
Timeliness: Timeliness and increased frequency of publication for key statistics in line 
with national standards as agreed upon by CSA and MDAs. 
                                                          
8  These were re-confirmed during negotiations.  
9 
 
(iii) 
Access: Data readily available to users through Open Data Portal and eCSA Program on 
Wheels.

A. Project Components 
24. 
The project has four components described ahead. The project components are 
designed to support the implementation of activities drawn from these strategic themes of the 
NSDS9, namely: (a) enhancing advocacy and use of statistics; (b) methodological improvements 
and statistical modernization; and (c) capacity building (organization and infrastructure) in the 
NSS. The project’s design takes into account the findings of the NSDS mid-term review and 
plans to support development of the NSDSII (2015-2018). These components are briefly 
described below.  
25. 
Component 1: Organizational and Infrastructure Capacity Development in the NSS 
(US$ 4.9 Million): Support to improve organizational performance, staff productivity, and data 
accessibility by strengthening planning and physical infrastructure at the CSA. 
26. 
The component aims to improve organizational performance, staff productivity and data 
accessibility by strengthening planning, training and physical infrastructure at the CSA, as per 
the findings of NSDS mid-term review, Central Statistical Office Business Process 
Reengineering (CSA-BPR), CSA Space Audit and other reviews. 
27. 
Sub-Component 1.1. Organizational Strengthening: This sub-component aims at 
enhancing institutional management and logistical capacity at the CSA. The project will, 
therefore, support the following activities: (i) strategic planning and visioning exercises for the 
introduction of improved management and administration systems in the CSA, and provide 
technical assistance to strengthen the national account statistics   (ii) upgrade of office space at 
the headquarters to conduct training for CSA and NSS staff and provision of furniture and 
equipment in headquarters ; (iii) executive development training, peer-to-peer learning and 
knowledge sharing with sister institutions for CSA and NSS stakeholder staff.  
28. 
Sub-Component 1.2. Physical Infrastructure: This sub-component aims at enhancing 
staff productivity in the CSA by improving working conditions. The project will, therefore, 
support: (i) construction and furnishing of 4 of the 25 branch office buildings that the CSA has 
planned to build in the next few years to introduce new work methods, organizational design and 
IT systems . Potential locations for branch office construction include Ambo, Hawassa, Mekele, 
and Bahir Dar. Selection criteria and other requirements, including sequencing, have been 
outlined in the ESMF, which was disclosed on the CSA website and Bank InfoShop on February 
13 and February 14, 2014, respectively. Model office designs have been prepared and are 
available in project files. 
29. 
Sub-Component 1.3. ICT Infrastructure, Systems and Tools for Data Production and 
Management: The objective of this sub-component is to modernize data collection, data entry, 
                                                          
9  As noted above in Section B paragraph 8. NSDS detailed description also provided in Annex 6. 
10 
 
data storage, data analysis, and dissemination capacity in the CSA. This will be accomplished 
through provision of a data-center, video conferencing equipment and infrastructure, and the 
latest survey technology and institutional management tools. The project will, therefore, finance 
(i) procurement and installation of data center and video conferencing infrastructure ; (ii) 
procurement of computers, laptops, tablets, iPads, and relevant hardware and software 
accessories, and (iii) training activities for the use of modern technologies (e.g. GPS, 
eCartography, eMapping, eSurveying, Infographics), computer-assisted personal interviewing 
(CAPI), and computer-assisted telephone interviewing (CATI) and other data collection, analysis 
and dissemination techniques and applications. The ICT sub-component would provide 
technological interface and support for the implementation of Component 2, which is aimed at 
enhanced data production; and Component 3, which is aimed at data quality assurance; and open 
data dissemination (see below). 
30. 
Activities in Component 1 are in close alignment with other ongoing capacity 
development initiatives in the area of ICT in support for the CSA’s work in collaboration with 
World Bank and other development partners. According to the NSDS mid-term review, support 
for organizational strengthening and infrastructure upgrading are considered critical for 
sustainable capacity improvement of the CSA and the overall NSS development. Only limited 
building infrastructure needs are being addressed under this component (i.e., construction of 4 or 
5 out of 25 planned offices nationwide). It would therefore be useful for the CSA to explore 
other financing options to fund additional facilities once this project is sufficiently advanced, and 
model CSA offices are constructed and made operational, and when SFR Project implementation 
rating is satisfactory or higher. 
31. 
Component 2: Statistical Data Development and Management (US$ 1.5 million): 
Support to strengthen the quality of statistical data production, compilation, and validation, 
including preparatory activities and technical assistance to help undertake selected NSDS 
priority surveys. 
32. 
This component will support activities to strengthen the quality of data produced, 
following internationally-accepted standards and methodologies in data collection, compilation, 
and validation. It will also support some preparatory activities, including sampling frame 
development, training, workshops, purchase and piloting of modern tools, and other technical 
assistance and logistical vehicles to help undertake some of the agreed-upon NSDS priority 
surveys. Data development activities would potentially inclu

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

nent 
aims at laying the foundation for long-term development of vital registration systems in the 
regions, as outlined in the recently-approved Vital Statistics Law. The NSDS has already made 
plans for a review and implementation of the system by the CSA in collaboration with regional 
governments. This component could, therefore, finance technical assistance to the relevant 
government agency in areas of instrument design and building CSA’s vital statistics data 
management and analytical capacity. 
38. 
The activities in Component 2 are in close alignment with NSDS, GTP and Vital 
Statistics Law priorities. In order to introduce flexibility in project design, efforts will be made 
under this component to partner with other institutions and agencies when the latest survey tools 
are tested and results shared to promote the potential scale-up of data production pilots (e.g. on 
vital statistics and use of ICT tools for poverty/other surveys)12. 
                                                          
12  Consistent with the World Bank’s twin goals and upcoming strategy (2013) [“eliminating extreme poverty…and boosting 
shared prosperity..”], lessons and outputs of the World Bank Africa Region’s “Listening to Africa” program would be shared 
(e.g. from Tanzania, Malawi, and Madagascar) and if possible tested in Ethiopia under this project component using grant 
resources from the Bank or other interested donor. Also, outputs of UNECA research program on the use of ICT for statistical 
surveys and census would be shared with CSA and other NSS members to promote learning.  
12 
 
39. 
Component 3: Statistical Methodology, Standards and Data Quality Assurance and 
Information Dissemination (US$ 1.9 Million): Support to promote, sensitize and implement the 
data quality assurance framework standard (“DQAF-E”) and support improvements in services 
for users, including dissemination of regular statistical publications to promote statistical 
education among citizens and non-governmental organizations. 
40. 
This component aims to promote, sensitize and implement the Data Quality Assurance 
Framework Standard (DQAF-E) prepared by the CSA for the NSS, and to support improvements 
in services for users, including dissemination of regular statistical publications produced by both 
the CSA and its key MDAs as per the release calendar, and to promote statistical education of 
citizens and NGOs.  This component will have two sub-components.  
41. 
Sub-Component 3.1. Statistical Methodology, Standards and Data Quality Assurance. 
This sub-component aims to promote, sensitize and implement the Data Quality Assurance 
Framework Standard (DQAF-E) prepared by the CSA for the NSS. The component will, 
therefore, finance: (i) educational and outreach materials on QAS and training and sensitization 
of CSA staff and NSS stakeholders at the CSA training center to be set up under the project ; (ii) 
organizing “specialized” short- and long-term educational statistical courses and study visits for 
CSA and partner MDAs staff on select data quality assurance topics (e.g. survey methods, 
poverty mapping techniques, gender analysis of household surveys, data production priorities); 
(iii) providing assistance to Household Consumption & Expenditure Survey (HCES) and 
Welfare & Monitoring Survey (WMS); and (iv) providing technical assistance to improve quality 
of poverty mapping and gender statistics and analysis. The CSA is receiving complementary 
resources from the World Bank-supported Protection of Basic Services (PBS) project for 
promoting quality standards in select sectors. 
42. 
Sub-Component 3.2: Information Dissemination: The aims of the sub-component are to 
support improvements in services for users, including dissemination of regular statistical 
publications produced by both the CSA and its key MDAs as per the release calendar, and to 
promote statistical education of citizens and NGOs. The component will, therefore, finance: (i) 
stakeholder analysis including development of user satisfaction index, training and 
communication support (e.g. via web, media, radio); (ii) upgrades to the CSA library and open 
web portal, which will enable civil society, NGOs, researchers, and the private sector to access 
the CSA and NSS data for policy making, investment decisions or research purposes; (iii) 
publication of flagship statistical reports and documents produced by the CSA to build the CSA 
brand; and (iv) the launch of the eCSA mobile education office by identifying and training 
appropriate staff,  offering adequate per diems, and procuring a vehicle (air-conditioned bus or 
similar transport) equipped with multi-media and ICT tools, as well as relevant statistical 
education materials and publications, for visits to educational institutions, libraries, 
municipalities, Woredas and other locations. This could help enhance the CSA’s leadership in 
the NSS and promote the importance of statistics in national and regional development. This 
could be undertaken as a combined effort of the CSA, MOFED, Statistical Council and regional 
governments, and other actors. 
13 
 
43. 
Component 4. Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 1.7 Million): Provide support to 
strength the monitoring and evaluation capabilities of the CSA with respect to the NSDS and the 
proposed Project’s coordination and fiduciary requirements. 
44. 
This component aims to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation capabilities of the CSA 
with respect to the NSDS and the proposed Project’s coordination and fiduciary requirements, 
including ESMF implementation. It will (i) finance consultations for the development of the next 
NSDSII, (ii) provide technical assistance to strengthen the national account statistics.; finance also 
M&E of GTP and GTP2 at an estimated cost of US$0.3 million. The component will also 
support SFR project management activities, including Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) implementation requirements and price contingency. The ESMF for the 
project has already been disclosed on February 13, 2014 and is available on CSA website and 
World Bank InfoShop on February 14, 2014. As part of this component, parallel financing will 
be provided by DFID for a period of 3 years to fund an in-country statistician to serve as an 
advisor to DG CSA and support the work with the Donor Working Group (See Annex 6)13. This 
will be an international expert in statistical development for advisory support on matters relating 
to NSDS implementation. 
B. Project Financing 
1. Grant Instrument 
45. 
The proposed project will be financed from the Bank’s Statistics for Results Facility– 
Catalytic Fund 14  (SRF-CF). The Catalytic Fund grant is complementary to financing for 
statistical surveys and assistance under ongoing World Bank and donor-assisted programs. For 
example, the World Bank and other donor-supported PBS program has provided support for 
health sector household surveys since 2011. The proposed project provides resources under 
Component 2 to partner with ongoing statistical capacity development programs promoting 
coordination and enhancing impacts.  
2. Project Cost and Financing 
46. 
Estimated Program Cost: The SRF project is expected to cost US$10million, financed 
through a grant from the SRF-CF. Moreover, the GOE has signed bilateral financing agreements 
                                                          
13  Draft TOR for this advisor is available in project files. 
 
14 The SFR is a global partnership initiative to scale up investments in statistical capacity. The SRF-CF (financed by the 
Netherlands government and DfID) is managed by the World Bank and provides grants to support countries that commit to the 
principles of the Catalytic Fund Charter.  Grants from the Catalytic fund aim to make sustainable improvements in the 
production, availability and use of quality statistics, to increase capacity in policy formulation and decision-making for 
development. In each participating country, the grant aims to: 
- Promote system-wide approach in statistics at the country level; 
- Substantially increase resources for implementing country-owned National Statistical Plans; 
- Explicit link improvements in the statistical system to needs of national and sectoral monitoring frameworks, and promote 
an improved national dialogue and partnership between statistics users and producers; and 
- Deliver more efficient and effective aid and technical assistance for strengthening statistical systems and results 
measurement. 
 
14 
 
with UNFPA, UNDP, EU, and other organizations to support the implementation of NSDS and 
other related statistical development activities.  A summary of the current estimated costs and 
sources of financing is provided in the tables below. 
Table 1: Summary of Allocations by Project Component 
COMPONENT 
US$ 
Million 
1. ORGANIZATIONAL AND INFRASTRUCTURE CAPACITY 
DEVELOPMENT IN THE NSS 
4.9 
1.1 Organizational strengthening  
 
1.2 Physical Infrastructure 
 
1.3 ICT Infrastructure., Systems and Tools 
 
  
 
2. STATISTICAL DATA DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
1.5 
2.1 Business Statistics 
 
2.2 Mining, Energy, Construction & Transport Sectors Statistics. 
 
2.3 Agricultural Census and Statistics Support 
 
2.4 Improving Coverage and Quality of the Annual Agricultural Sample Survey  
 
2.5 Vital Statistics Support  
 
 
 
3. STATISTICAL METHODOLOGY, STANDARDS AND DATA QUALITY 
ASSURANCE AND INFORMATION DISSEMINATION 
1.9 
3.1 Data Quality Assurance Framework  
 
3.2Information Dissemination 
 
 
 
4. MONITORING AND EVALUATION 
1.7 
Grand Total 
10.0 
  
47. 
Retroactive Financing. All eligible expenditures that would be incurred on or after April 
21, 2014 up to the date of the signing of the financing agreement, up to an aggregate amount not 
to exceed US$500,000 equivalent, would be eligible for retroactive financing. This retroactive 
financing is intended to finance the following activities: inter alia, (a) hiring of FM and 
procurement experts and for set up of project management office; (b) hiring of construction 
experts to meet the needs of the ESMF; and (c) hiring of consultant to prepare an updated user 
satisfaction index.  
 
48. 
Status of NSDS Implementation: The implementation of the NSDS began in 2009. 
Over the past three years, the CSA conducted major surveys, which are included in the NSDS 
document. These include the Household Income and Expenditure Consumption Survey, the 
Welfare Monitoring Survey, and the Demographic and Health Survey. The CSA also regularly 
conducted the Annual Agricultural Sample Survey. In addition, the CSA implemented several 
project-based surveys and studies within the NSDS framework. On the physical and IT 
infrastructure front, the construction of the headquarters building in Addis Ababa and the 
networking of branch offices are in progress. The CSA has also acquired some GPS and CAPI 
machines that are being used for pilot activities in selected enumeration areas.  
 
15 
 
Table 2: Summary of Allocations by Six Component Themes of the NSDS 
NSDS STRATEGIC THEME 
  
  
NSDS 
Planned 
US$ Mill. 
NSDS 
Gaps 
US$ 
Mill. 
NSDS 
Actual 
US$ 
Mill. 
Theme 1: Statistical Law Passed 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
Theme 2: Data Quality Assessment Framework for Ethiopia (DQAF-E) 
0.13 
0.06 
0.07 
Theme 3: Enhancing Advocacy and Use of Statistics 
0.04 
0.04 
0.00 
Theme 4: Methodological Improvements and Statistical Modernization 
72.65 
58.40 
14.25 
Theme 5: Capacity Development in the NSS 
7.11 
4.19 
2.92 
Theme 6: Relationship to Monitoring and Evaluation PASDEP and other 
Interventions 
0.61 
0.61 
0.00 
Total 
80.54 
63.30 
17.24 
 
49. 
Table 2 presents a summary of the status of the NSDS budget by its six strategic themes. 
The NSDS planned for about US$ 53 Million. However, with the revision of the NSDS period by 
one year and revisions on selected budget items the amount that reflects the current situation in 
the NSS is US$ 80.53 Million. The Actual column in Table 2 is the sum of the amount spent for 
completed activities, the amount committed or earmarked for the activity by donors, and the 
amount that will come from the Government. The Gaps column is the difference between the 
Planned and the Actual. Therefore, the proposed SFR project is expected to narrow the budget 
gap by US$ 10 Million and its PDO is appropriately outlined to cater to this available funding to 
achieve measureable results. Much more, it is envisaged that the existence of the SRF program 
itself and the establishment of the National Partnership Group (NPG) for Ethiopia will be able to 
trigger additional funding from government and development partners, which would likely close 
the existing gap. GoE recognizes that funding gap needs to be filled through active engagement 
of donors and efforts that promote evidence based decision making in MDAs so that entities 
assign adequate resources and attention, thereby meeting the NSDS targets. GoE is also planning 
to initiate the NSDSII exercise so that resource mobilization effort could be boosted and 
implementation of current NSDS be expedited. It is also planning to disseminate the findings of 
NSDS mid-term review to highlight challenges to NSS stakeholders and policymakers. 
50. 
Several donors are supporting statistical development in Ethiopia and the proposed 
project would complement and leverage these efforts through partnerships. Table 3 presents a 
summary of the ongoing donor supported efforts, which are broadly in line with the NSDS 
requirements and NSS upgrading needs over the medium term. 
 
 
16 
 
Table 3: Main Donor Supported Statistical Programs Supporting CSA 
Institution 
Project 
Objectives 
Financing Amount 
UNDP  
Development Assistance 
Group Monitoring and 
Evaluation Pooled Fund 
Support to 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation System of 
PRSP and MDGs 
Contribute to the capacity of 
institutions to deliver their mandates 
in M&E of implemented GTP.  
US$2 Million 
UNFPA 
Increased 
Availability of 
Population Data 
Generate and make accessible 
disaggregated population data. 
US$30 Million over 
five years 
FAO/European 
Commission 
Support to Food 
Security Information 
System 
Improve quality of some essential 
food security related data through 
adapted technology. Food security 
issues better understood through 
selected studies. 
Euro 2 Million 
World Bank and other 
development partners 
Protection of Basic 
Services (PBS) 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
Component 
Capacity improvement of EDQAF 
unit to conduct PBS program M&E. 
Support Welfare Monitoring and 
Household Income Consumption 
Surveys 
US$ 2 Million 
(overall PBS funding 
is US$6.2 Million 
over 5 years for 
related tasks) 
C. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design  
51. 
Forward planning and stakeholder consultation is essential for addressing the 
challenges of the exploding demand for statistical information in the Country. National 
statistical agencies in developing countries typically tend to give low priority to access to 
aggregated and record-level statistical data beyond the immediate interest groups (e.g. health and 
education ministries). They also do not conduct regular consultation with NSS members and 
stakeholders to assess new data needs and quality concerns due to resource and other constraints. 
This project addresses these concerns and introduces design features that enhance statistical 
planning and data coverage through: (i) development and dissemination of micro-data access 
policies in consultation with NSS members and other stakeholders; (ii) upgrades to the CSA’s e-
infrastructure (e.g. data center, disaster management system, web portal, storage, collection 
tools) to collect and disseminate data and survey results; (iii) the introduction of e-learning for 
dissemination of statistical quality standards and training on good practices and methodologies; 
and (iv) creation of a platform for users to provide feedback (at Central Headquarters and Branch 
office levels) on the performance of the NSS, which is especially useful in holding data 
producers accountable for delivering quality statistical products and services and for identifying 
new data needs.   
52. 
Improvements in statistics should be closely linked to national priorities (e.g. 
monitoring of poverty, gender, and competitiveness) to ensure the success of projects. 
Strengthening the link between the statistical system and the GTP monitoring system will be a 
key goal, and the CSA team will work closely with Ministry of Finance and other concerned 
entities to promote databases to public and private users. Support for the development of next 
NSDS, vital statistics, national accounts, and stakeholder training under the SFR project would 
encourage coordination among NSS entities nationwide and promote success. 
17 
 
53. 
Adequate institutional capacity is essential for sustainable data collection, 
production and dissemination. Experience in developing countries indicates that improving 
organizational planning and structures, human resources, and logistical systems and 
infrastructure is a critical pre-requisite for good performance and requires attention over a 
medium- to long-term horizon. The CSA is in the process of modernizing its operations and 
systems to enhance data production capabilities. It is also trying to address staff turnover and 
other incentive system challenges. In order to improve institutional performance, the proposed 
project would train managerial, administrative and statistical staff, as well as build dignified and 
appropriate office space and transport facilities. Also, specialized skill-building and modern data 
collection IT tools would be funded for a more sustainable provision of products and services to 
users. 
D. Alternatives Considered and Reasons for Rejection 
54. 
Smaller-scale interventions in specific statistical areas are inappropriate to address 
underlying institutional issues faced by the CSA, which is responsible for NSS coordination 
and quality assurance. In the past, DPs and Government attempts at building statistical capacity 
have been piecemeal and focused primarily on data collection exercises or training in specific 
subject matter areas (e.g. health, living conditions). Previous interventions have not been 
adequate to address the CSA’s underlying organizational and statistical development constraints 
affecting its performance. 
55. 
Simultaneous capacity building support to all MDAs would be too ambitious. 
Simultaneous support to all MDAs has been rejected, as many MDAs (e.g. health and education) 
already have programs and statistical units that collect and compile their own statistical reports, 
obtained as a by-product of their administrative responsibilities. NSDS mid-review, GOE BPR 
and other assessments indicate that the CSA, which has the principle responsibilities of NSS 
coordination/quality assurance (since 2005) and data production and dissemination, requires 
scaled-up assistance to effectively fulfill its mandate. Strategic targeting of CSA by building its 
leadership and institutional quality over the medium term is expected to generate nationwide 
benefits.

A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
56. 
The CSA will be the project-implementing agency, and is a key agency responsible 
for the overall NSDS program, along with the Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Development (MOFED) and the Statistical Council (SC). The CSA has prepared its draft 
project operational manual (OM) and project procurement plan for the next years.  
57. 
Annual Work Plan. In order to better plan and advance implementation an annual 
planning exercise is to take place as part of implementation arrangements by the CSA, the main 
implementing agency of the project. The annual work plan review will help distil lessons and 
make adjustments in keeping with regional preferences.