[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 54044 chars (22.9% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
1. 
Ethiopia is a large, predominately rural, and diverse country with a rapidly growing population. Its land mass 
is more than 1 million km2 (the eighth largest in Sub-Saharan Africa) and the country has an estimated population of 
approximately 100 million (the second largest in the region), more than 80 percent of whom live in rural areas. 
Ethiopia is also very diverse, with 98 nationalities and peoples1 and more than 93 spoken languages.2 At an annual 
population growth rate of 2.5 percent, Ethiopia’s population is estimated to reach 140 million by 2030.3 
2. 
Over the past decade, Ethiopia achieved substantial progress in promoting economic, social, and human 
development. For the past 10 years, the Ethiopian economy has grown at an annual rate of over 10 percent in real 
terms, making it one of the world’s fastest-growing economies. This period of robust growth was driven by large-
scale public investment in infrastructure and energy, which was made possible by favorable commodity prices and 
international debt-relief efforts in the mid-2000s. The poverty rate declined from 55.5 percent in 2000 to 26.7 percent 
in 2016.4 However, this achievement was more pronounced in urban centers than in rural areas, in part because 
droughts caused by El Niño affected farm incomes during this period.5 Besides mitigating poverty, Ethiopia made 
significant progress toward the other Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) of 2015. The primary school enrollment 
rate quadrupled, child mortality rate was halved, and the number of people with access to clean water more than 
doubled. Average life expectancy has increased by about one year annually since 2000 and is now higher than the 
averages for both Sub-Saharan Africa and low-income countries worldwide.6 
3. 
Nevertheless, Ethiopia continues to face serious development challenges. Ethiopia remains one of the world’s 
poorest countries, with a per capita income (that is, gross national income per capita) of US$740 in 2017, far lower 
than the Sub-Saharan Africa regional average of US$1,646.7 In 2015, Ethiopia ranked 174th out of 188 on the Human 
Development Index.8 Maternal and child mortality rates remain high. About 38 percent of children under five are 
stunted, 24 percent are underweight, and 10 percent are wasted.9 Access to education has increased, but only 57 
percent of children starting first grade will complete the ninth grade. In addition, Ethiopia hosts more than 920,000 
refugees, primarily from neighboring Somalia, Sudan, South Sudan, and Eritrea, and the number of internally 
displaced people has recently doubled due to sporadic unrest. While Ethiopia remains one of the most income-equal 
countries in the world, with a national Gini coefficient of 0.33 in 2015, there are significant variances at the regional 
and woreda (district)10 level. Gender disparities are also profound nationally, and a combination of cultural norms 
and socioeconomic inequality greatly increases the risks of gender-based violence (GBV) faced by women.11 
                                            
1 Various ethnic groups are given the designation of nationalities and peoples by the Ethiopian constitution.  
2 World Bank, Country Partnership Framework for the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the Period FY18-FY22  
3 United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA), Population Division, World Population Prospects: The 2017 
Revision (UNDESA, 2017). 
4 The poverty rate is measured at the international poverty line of US$1.9 per day in 2011 purchasing power parity terms. 
5 Government of Ethiopia (GoE), Central Statistical Agency (CSA), Ethiopia—Demographic and Health Survey 2016 (CSA, 2017).  
6 International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Economic Outlook, April 2018 (IMF, 2018). 
7 World Bank, World Development Indicators (World Bank, 2018). 
8 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Human Development Reports: 2018 Statistical Update ( UNDP, 2018). 
9 CSA and ORC Macro, Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey 2016 (CSA, 2016). 
10 Woredas or districts are the third-level administrative divisions. They are further subdivided into wards (kebeles) or 
neighborhood associations, which are the smallest unit of local government.  
11 World Bank, Ethiopia—Priorities for Ending Extreme Poverty and Promoting Shared Prosperity: Systematic Country Diagnostic 
(World Bank, 2016).  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
One WASH—Consolidated Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Account Project (One WASH—CWA) (P167794) 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 103  
     
 
4. 
The Government of Ethiopia’s (GoE’s) current economic program is defined in the 2016–2020 Growth and 
Transformation Plan (GTP) Phase II, which aims to enable Ethiopia to achieve lower-middle-income status by 2025. 
The strategy, linked to both the United Nations’ 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), advances reform efforts launched under the GTP I, which focused on boosting agricultural 
productivity and accelerating growth through large-scale public investment in infrastructure. The GTP II emphasizes 
the need to maintain the high rates of economic growth achieved, but it shifts focus to expand the role of the private 
sector. Achievement of these objectives requires concerted and multifaceted approaches to: (i) increase investments 
in human capital; and (ii) address the impacts of climate change, especially given the country’s long history of 
recurring droughts that have increased in magnitude, frequency, and impact.12 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
5. 
Ethiopia has made significant progress in improving water supply and sanitation (WSS) services in the past 
ten years. Over 52 million people in Ethiopia now live within 1.5 kilometers (km) of an improved drinking water source 
compared with only 6 million people in 1990. Over the same period, rates of open defecation (OD) fell by 63 percent, 
which was the largest decrease observed in the world.13 About 67 million people gained access to a latrine, at an 
average rate of 2.6 million people per year. Sanitation and hygiene promotion were integrated into wider health-care 
delivery mechanisms and utilized behavioral change communication (BCC). 
6. 
Notwithstanding the progress, much remains to be done. Just 10 percent of all latrines constructed in rural 
areas qualify as improved sanitation facilities.14 A World Bank water supply, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) poverty 
assessment15 reported that the 2016 Ethiopia Socioeconomic Survey found that a significant number of statistically 
sampled rural springs and wells were contaminated with E. coli. Diarrheal diseases were the second-leading cause of 
death in Ethiopia in 2017,16 with lack of access to safe WSS services ranking as the second-highest risk factor for death 
and disability—just behind undernutrition. With rapid increase in population and increase in GoE’s water supply 
service level standards, an estimated 42 million people are without access to a safe drinking water supply and 94 
million have no access to improved sanitation, for many OD is the only option. The WSS situation is much better in 
urban areas according to the assessment but significant equity differences exist between wealthier and poorer 
households, and larger and smaller urban centers. 
7. 
Women and girls suffer disproportionately from the lack of adequate WASH services. They bear the burden of 
water collection over long distances, which has been associated with negative effects on well-being, school 
attendance, and a higher risk of GBV. A high prevalence of OD and the poor quality of sanitation facilities also 
compromise the convenience, safety, health, and dignity of rural women and girls. Gender disparities are exacerbated 
by the relatively low participation of women and representatives from vulnerable groups, including people with 
disabilities and youth, in committees responsible for the planning, implementation, and operation and maintenance 
(O&M) of WASH facilities. 
                                            
12 Ethiopia has experienced more than 15 drought events in the past 50 years, including the 2015/2016 El Niño drought and the 
“Indian Dipole” event in 2017.  
13 World Bank, Maintaining the Momentum While Addressing Service Quality and Equity: A Diagnostic of Water Supply, Sanitation, 
Hygiene, and Poverty in Ethiopia (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2018), 1. 
14 As defined by the World Health Organization/ United Nations Children’s Fund (WHO/UNICEF) Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP), 
an improved sanitation facility is one that hygienically separates human excreta from human contact. Sanitation facilities shared 
with other households are not considered to be improved.  
15 World Bank, Maintaining the Momentum.  
16 Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME), Global Burden of Disease, “Ethiopia,” http://www.healthdata.org/ethiopia.  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
One WASH—Consolidated Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Account Project (One WASH—CWA) (P167794) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 103  
     
 
8. 
Climate change is making water events more extreme. Recurrent droughts, floods, and rising temperatures 
make it more difficult to manage water resources effectively and to ensure continuity in WSS service delivery. 
Moreover, rainfall variability has contributed to increasing frequency and intensity of floods. Recurrent droughts and 
floods are the greatest climate threat to local communities,17 with wide-ranging impacts on human capital outcomes 
and the broader Ethiopian economy. Already constrained by the uneven spatial and temporal distribution of water 
resources, there is increasing competition between human consumption and productive uses. Coping with climate 
change and its impact on both surface and groundwater sources requires the collection and analysis of water resource 
data, better forecasting of weather and long-run climate change impacts, increasing stakeholder involvement 
through education, and the establishment of early warning systems. 
9. 
The institutional framework adopted by GoE for WSS decentralization has yielded positive results, but 
challenges remain. In 2003, the country decentralized service delivery responsibilities to the regional and woreda 
levels, and now provides support through formula-based fiscal transfers (block grants). Decentralization has placed 
WSS service delivery in the hands of local governments, thereby making them more accountable to their respective 
communities. However, the devolution of responsibilities has not always been accompanied by adequate levels of 
technical and institutional support. In addition, newly established small towns struggle to keep up with rapid 
population growth and demand for basic services, and their limited financial and technical resources do not allow 
them to meet GTP II standards for WSS services. Smaller regions and predominantly pastoralist areas with weaker 
capacities have seen poorer human development outcomes. In some areas, influxes of refugees and internally 
displaced people further complicate WSS service delivery and strain local water sources. 
10. The Government’s flagship program is the One WASH National Program (OWNP). It is guided by the 
Government’s established WASH Implementation Framework (WIF).18 In conjunction with the OWNP, the 
Government established the consolidated WASH account (CWA) to pool financing for the implementation of the 
OWNP from the Government’s own source and donors. Phase I, which ran from 2014 to June 2019, was financed by 
Finland, the United Kingdom, the African Development Bank (AfDB), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 
and the World Bank. It represented a transition from project-based engagements to a multisectoral programmatic 
approach. The emphasis of this initial phase was on addressing gaps in access to WSS services. The World Bank 
provides fiduciary, safeguard, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) oversight for the overall CWA activities.  
11. With the launch of OWNP Phase II in 2018, the emphasis is broadening beyond access. The Government aims 
to improve water service delivery and water quality through (i) the fostering of BCC; (ii) a more integrated approach 
to WSS that involves water resources management (WRM); (iii) the provision of improved WSS infrastructure; and 
(iv) the improvement of O&M to keep systems operating as designed. It has also adopted the Citywide Inclusive 
Sanitation (CWIS) approach in small- and medium-sized towns.19 This approach, being rolled out under the World 
Bank–supported Second Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project (UWSSP II) (P156433) in Addis Ababa and 22 
secondary cities, promotes an integrated approach in the adoption of better sanitation practices, siting, and 
construction of hygienic latrines and water supplies to limit cross-contamination and ensure that water and sanitation 
materials are easily available. OWNP Phase II also addresses concerns over climate resilience, gender, and local 
                                            
17 GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery), “Climate Change Country Profile for Ethiopia,” GFDRRR, 2016.  
18 The National WASH Implementation Framework (WIF) was developed by the GoE and signed on August 2011. This is the framework 
for implementing the Ethiopian National WASH Program, undertaken by rural and urban communities and supported by 
governmental agencies, civil society organizations, the private sector, and international donors.  
19 Small-sized towns are defined as those with between 2,000 and 20,000 inhabitants; medium-sized towns have between 20,000 
and 100,000 inhabitants (Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, “One WASH National Program: A Multi-Sectoral Swap,” Final 
Program Document, August 2013) 
https://www.cmpethiopia.org/content/download/2423/10235/file/Final%20One%20WASH%20PD%20August%2031%202013.zip).  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
One WASH—Consolidated Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Account Project (One WASH—CWA) (P167794) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 103  
     
 
private sector participation. Capacity building for community WASH committees (WASHCOMs), urban water utilities, 
and local authorities to safely manage and keep water supply systems operating as designed is central to the effort. 
12. The roles and responsibilities for WASH sector management, divided across federal and local authorities, 
needs further refinement. The adoption of the OWNP gave stakeholders a common policy agenda and goals but 
responsibilities are fragmented. Four federal ministries and their respective regional bureaus share responsibility for 
the implementation of the OWNP: (i) the Ministry of Finance (MoF); (ii) the Ministry of Water, Irrigation, and Energy 
(MoWIE), through the newly established Water Development Commission (WDC)20 and its Water Resources 
Development Fund (WRDF); (iii) the Ministry of Education (MoE); and (iv) the Ministry of Health (MoH).21 Adding to 
the dispersion of responsibility, regional WASH bureaus, woredas, towns, and communities are responsible for 
planning and managing their WSS services.  
13. Meeting the sector’s challenges requires that local levels are technically and financially capable to respond. 
Only then will the federal entities be able to step back and concentrate on providing the sector’s overall policy 
directions and capital investments. Building technical capacity at the woreda, town, and community levels is essential 
to strengthening delivery mechanisms and promoting smooth cooperation and coordination among the responsible 
ministries. Technical assistance (TA) is also needed for the WDC and the WRDF to strengthen their capacity for 
implementation and lending at the local level for WSS investments. At the federal level weaknesses remain in water 
resource planning capacity, national surface and groundwater monitoring, and in disseminating drought and flood 
early warning systems.  
C. Relevance to Higher-level Objectives 
14. The proposed Project supports the World Bank’s twin goals and aligns closely with the World Bank’s Human 
Capital Project and efforts to build climate resilience. Human capital is central to the World Bank Group’s efforts to 
end extreme poverty by 2030 and to raise the incomes of people in the bottom 40 percentile of the wealth 
distribution of each country. Ethiopia is an early adopter of the Human Capital Project, which aims to address three 
aspects of human capital: child survival, health (stunting and adult morbidity), and educational attainment. Through 
multisectoral work, the World Bank has engaged in Ethiopia’s Investing in Early Years initiative, which is a joint 
undertaking involving the health and nutrition, water, agriculture, and social protection sectors. The proposed Project 
aims to build on this momentum to scale up interventions in sanitation that directly link with this initiative and will 
be implemented in close collaboration with the health and education sectors. It also aims to complement 
interventions of the National Nutrition Plan and strategically align with the MoH’s Woreda Transformation Plan, of 
which improved hygiene and sanitation form an integral pillar. Further, sustainable management of water resources 
is key to improving agricultural productivity and mitigates the risk of negative environmental externalities that have 
the potential of undermining poverty alleviation, shared prosperity, and access to basic services. Through 
interventions that enhance WRM and WSS infrastructure and service delivery, the Project intends to improve local 
resilience to climate change related to floods and droughts in the targeted woredas and small- and medium-sized 
towns. 
15. The proposed Project is fully aligned with the World Bank’s Ethiopia Country Partnership Framework (CPF) of 
fiscal years (FYs) 2018/19–FY 2022/2322, which in turn is aligned with the GoE’s GTP II that covers the period FY 
2015/16–FY 2019/20. The proposed Project objectives are directly linked to CPF’s Focus Area Two, Building resilience 
and inclusiveness, which includes: (i) Objective 2.3—increased access to improved water and sanitation; (ii) Objective 
2.5—improved early child nutrition and early learning outcomes; and (iii) Objective 2.6—enhanced management of 
                                            
20 MoWIE, Proclamation No. 1097/2018.  
21 The Ministry of Urban Development and Housing plays an important role in planning and regulating urban infrastructure.  
22 Report No. 115135 discussed by the Board of Executive Directors on June 27, 2017. 
 
The World Bank 
 
One WASH—Consolidated Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Account Project (One WASH—CWA) (P167794) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 103  
     
 
natural resources and climate risks. The proposed Project is also linked to CPF’s Focus Area Three, Improving 
institutional accountability and confronting corruption, which includes Objective 3—increased capacity and improved 
governance in service delivery. 
16. The Project is also aligned with the sector objectives of development partners (DPs). Given these partners’ 
convergence with the GoE’s and World Bank’s goals for improved WRM, they are expected to contribute to the 
pooled CWA, managed by the MoF, increasing the efficiency of WASH sector planning and streamlining reporting.

A. Project Development Objective 
PDO Statement 
To increase access to safe water supply, sanitation, and hygiene services and strengthen capacity for water resources 
management and service delivery. 
 
PDO Level Indicators 
17. The PDO will be assessed against six outcome indicators:  
i. 
Number of people provided with access to safe drinking water services23 under the Project 
(rural/urban/female) 
ii. 
Number of people provided with access to safe sanitation services24 under the Project 
(rural/urban/female) 
iii. 
Proportion of kebeles25 within the Project woredas declared and verified as OD free  
iv. 
Proportion of water schemes that are functional and supply safe drinking water in areas under the 
Project 
v. 
Proportion of urban water service providers covering their operational costs under the Project 
vi. 
Proportion of rural and urban water supply scheme designs using data from the water resources 
management information system under this Project 
B. Project Components 
18. The proposed Project builds on the lessons learned and positive results achieved over the past decade, 
including from World Bank support. It will support investments in both rural and urban settings consistent with 
achieving the OWNP and SDG targets. In rural areas, it will support WASH services in Woredas selected based on 
available resource and selection criteria and will build on investments made in the 382 woredas supported under the 
Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Project, P133591 (WASHP) and by other DPs through the CWA, by providing 
WSS services to an additional 2 million people in rural areas. It will extend WASH support to targeted small- and 
medium-sized towns, reaching a further 1 million people with piped water and 442,000 people with sanitation 
services. It will also support an estimated 8,260 WASHCOMs and 180 utilities and help establish 83 new sanitation 
marketing centers. The proposed Project will also seek to make a significant improvement in the percentage of rural 
                                            
23 Safe drinking water services need to meet specific conditions of quality (water supplied should be free from fecal and priority 
chemical contamination), accessibility (located on premises for urban households, and within a 30-minute round trip of rural 
households), and availability (based on GTP II per capita standards), as detailed in the results framework. 
24 Safe sanitation services need to meet the specified conditions for accessibility (an improved facility that is not shared with other 
households) and service quality (excreta is safely disposed of in situ or emptied, transported, and treated offsite), as detailed in the 
results framework. 
25 Kebeles (wards) are fourth-level administrative divisions and constitute a subdivision of woredas (districts). 
 
The World Bank 
 
One WASH—Consolidated Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Account Project (One WASH—CWA) (P167794) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 103  
     
 
centers declared OD free; move consumers up the sanitation “ladder”; further promote women’s participation in the 
sector; promote local private sector participation; prioritize the geographic targeting of WASH investments to areas 
where undernutrition and outbreaks of excreta- and water-borne diseases are prevalent; and operationalize a sector 
management information system (MIS) to enable a shift toward results-based implementation approaches. 
19. The proposed Project replicates the approach taken in WASHP and follows the Government’s OWNP Phase II 
program document. The OWNP provides the framework for harmonizing GoE and donor approaches to planning, 
procurement, implementation, and financing, and serves as the foundation on which a closer partnership can be built 
between planners, implementers, DPs, and others to achieve common goals. Under the WASHP, the use of the CWA 
allowed donors to pool funds into a single account to harmonize planning, budgeting, implementation and reporting 
of WASH activities. The proposed Project will follow a similar approach. The CWA is the primary financing instrument 
through which DPs channel their resources to jointly implement the activities set out in the OWNP. The proposed 
financing by the International Development Association (IDA) would be the first donor support to OWNP Phase II and 
is expected to have a catalytic role in attracting finance from other donors and international financial institutions. An 
estimated US$290 million has been mobilized and will be channeled through the CWA from existing and new DPs 
once their resource allocations are confirmed. The Project currently dimensions result from the IDA’s contribution. 
As funds are added to the CWA on a rolling basis, the Consolidated Results Framework will be updated as needed in 
the Project Operations Manual (POM). Once the majority of contributing DPs commit their resources, consolidated 
CWA results will be reviewed at Mid-Term Review (MTR) stage and revised accordingly in the Results Framework to 
reflect consolidated targets and results. 
20. The proposed Project provides incentive mechanisms to promote efficiency that will lay the foundation for a 
shift toward results-based financing. Ten percent of IDA financing will remain unallocated at the beginning of the 
Project and will be used as funds to incentivize and empower performance. At midterm review, the unallocated 
resources will be allocated to regions based on progress in meeting predetermined Project performance criteria that 
are outlined in Annex 2 and will be set out in the POM. This approach has been introduced to embed incentives, since 
disbursement-linked indicators cannot be adopted due to the lack of a sector MIS to adequately monitor results. The 
financing thus allocated will be used for subprojects that will be appraised based on predetermined criteria set out 
in Annex 2 for delegated and non-delegated regions. Financing will be provided regionally on a “first appraised, first 
financed” basis until the unallocated amount is used. 
Component 1—Rural Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene (US$110 million equivalent of which US$92.29 million 
equivalent is from IDA financing).  
21. This component will help increase access to safe and reliable WSS services and promote hygienic practices in 
selected rural woredas that have not previously benefited from the WASHP interventions or that require expansion 
and improvement of services in new communities to achieve universal access. For woredas chronically impacted by 
climate variability and where water resources are insufficient to meet demands, considerations for multi-woreda 
schemes will be developed under Component 4. These activities will be complemented with measures to protect 
water sources, improve water quality, and increase sustainable water use, thereby increasing resilience to climate-
exacerbated droughts and floods in the targeted woredas. The component is structured into two subcomponents: (i) 
increasing rural access to WSS services; and (ii) enhancing service delivery management capacity. 
Subcomponent 1.A—Increasing Rural Access to Water Supply and Sanitation Services (US$96.60 million 
equivalent of which US$82.80 is from IDA financing) 
22. This subcomponent will implement and continue the support provided through the Sustainable and Equitable 
WASH (P157690) Programmatic TA. It will finance the following activities: 
 
The World Bank 
 
One WASH—Consolidated Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Account Project (One WASH—CWA) (P167794) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 103  
     
 
i. 
Infrastructure investments for rural water supply, including the construction and rehabilitation of water 
supply schemes based on a sector-approved menu of technology options (that considers water quality 
standards, gender-informed design, climate adaptation strategies, and the scoping and financing of 
renewable energy sources, including non-carbon-based solutions).26  The rehabilitation and development 
of new water supply infrastructure will increase the available water supply and the reliability of its service 
provision, thereby making the beneficiaries less vulnerable to water shortages and droughts. 
ii. 
TA and procurement of goods and TA to support rural water supply planning and capacity building 
activities such as: (i) the development of Woreda Strategic WASH Plans; and (ii) capacity building to 
strengthen and sustain participating woredas’ capacity to plan, coordinate, implement, and manage WSS 
services jointly with other OWNP core implementing sectors. Better planning and management of WSS 
services will lead to more reliable services, more adaptive WRM, a reduction in water losses and non-
functionality. All of these will increase the beneficiaries’ resilience to droughts and floods. 
iii. 
TA and procurement of goods and TA to support supply- and demand-side sanitation interventions. 
Demand-side interventions will include: (i) the rolling out of new BCC campaigns, closely aligned with 
health and nutrition messaging, that promote a gender-inclusive design, links to sanitation and GBV, and 
address issues of household water quality and safe storage; and (ii) the establishment of community 
savings structures to promote household investments in the construction and upgrading of domestic 
sanitation facilities. On the supply side, it will support: (i) the scale-up of pilot interventions to establish 
sanitation marketing centers; and (ii) sanitation marketing capacity building for vocational training 
centers, microcredit institutions, micro and small enterprises (MSEs), local governments, etc. These 
activities will improve both sanitation facilities and practices and contribute to a reduction in the discharge 
of untreated effluents into water bodies, which would reduce potential adverse impacts of contaminated 
flood waters.  
Subcomponent 1.B—Enhancing Service Delivery Management Capacity (US$13.40 million of which US$11.49 
million equivalent is from IDA financing)  
23. This subcomponent will finance TA and procurement of goods to improve sustainability, addressing issues of 
poor water quality, non-functionality, and postconstruction follow-up. Activities will include: (i) enabling 
WASHCOMs to operate water services; (ii) clustering WASHCOMs with nearby urban utilities to enlarge TA 
opportunities; (iii) leveraging women- and youth-led MSEs to address supply chain and O&M challenges; (iv) 
strengthening the capacity of the relevant water, health, and education regional bureaus, woreda offices, and 
community facilitation teams (CFTs); (v) enhancing WRM and drinking water quality monitoring; (vi) promoting 
hygiene and household safe water treatment and storage practices; and (vii) enhancing O&M training curricula under 
vocational skills programs to increase local private sector capacity (e.g technicians, artisans, construction firms, etc.).  
Component 2—Urban Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene (US$105 million equivalent of which US$90 million 
equivalent is from IDA financing).  
24. This component will contribute to increasing access to WSS services and to strengthening the capacity of town 
water boards and utilities to effectively manage water resources and WSS service delivery in selected small- and 
medium-sized towns. More efficient, sustainably run utilities will lead to reduced water losses and energy efficiency 
gains, which will increase water supply, improve water quality, and lead to more climate-resilient infrastructure. 
Based on lessons from the WASHP, this component will follow a stepped approach that includes the provision of TA 
                                            
26 Twenty-eight RPSs that are expected to be newly constructed within the targeted rural woredas have finalized designs, and 
bidding documents are ready for tendering. 
 
The World Bank 
 
One WASH—Consolidated Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Account Project (One WASH—CWA) (P167794) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 103  
     
 
for some 180 selected towns and financing of infrastructure investments for selected towns that meet readiness 
criteria and availability of resource, as outlined in Annex 2 and the POM. It will finance the following activities: 
i.  Infrastructure investments in urban water supply, including: (i) the construction, rehabilitation, and 
optimization of water production, treatment, and distribution systems, which will increase resilience to 
droughts through improvement of water supply and service reliability; and (ii) the application of climate 
adaptation measures such as conjunctive use, strategic storage, and reduction of nonrevenue water (NRW) 
to strengthen water supply systems’ resilience to droughts and floods.27 
ii.  Infrastructure investments in urban sanitation that will promote the CWIS approach to urban sanitation 
service provision.28 The proposed investments include: (i) the construction and rehabilitation of public and 
communal sanitation facilities; (ii) the creation of sanitation marketing centers; and (iii) on-site treatment 
at public sanitation facilities and fecal sludge handling sites. Rehabilitation and development of sanitation 
infrastructure will enhance the residents’ resilience to floods (as explained under Subcomponent 1Aiii). 
iii.  TA and procurement of goods for urban WSS, including: (i) the preparation of town WSS business plans 
(TWBPs) that consider demand, utilize a gender-informed design, define climate adaptation strategies 
(including contingency planning), assess infrastructure needs, vet proposed tariffs, and highlight human 
resources needs; (ii) the establishment and/or strengthening of urban water boards and water utilities to 
efficiently manage water resources and WSS assets and services; (iii) the preparation of feasibility and 
detailed design studies for selected WSS investments, including adequate climate change adaptation 
measures; (iv) the design and implementation of operational efficiency improvements to reduce NRW and 
save energy (e.g., reduction in pumping costs, use of renewable energy, etc.); (v) the scoping and vetting of 
sanitation options within the TWBPs; (vi) the establishment of sanitation marketing centers to be operated 
by the local private sector; (vii) the promotion and capacity building of women- and youth-led MSEs for the 
supply chain and O&M of sanitation facilities; (viii) capacity building support for national and regional water 
technology institutes and (ix) the promotion of microcredit institutions to assist urban househo

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

contribute to strengthening the management of water resources for service delivery and 
to increasing access to WASH services in selected flood- and drought-prone areas (details found in Annex 2). The 
component is divided into the following three subcomponents: (i) water resource monitoring and planning; (ii) 
climate-adaptive service delivery; and (iii) a contingency emergency response component (CERC).  
Subcomponent 4.A—Water Resource Monitoring and Planning (US$5 million of which US$4.29 million equivalent 
is from IDA financing)  
27. This subcomponent, through the River Basin Development Authority reporting to the MoWIE and the National 
Meteorological Agency, will support the consolidation and collation of monitoring and planning data on surface 
and groundwater resources to inform the design and management of water supply service delivery. It builds on 
activities supported by the World Bank–financed Modernization of Hydrometeorological Services TA (P162600) and 
will enhance the WSS sector and beneficiaries’ resilience to climate change—as adequately managed water resources 
are key to dealing with recurrent droughts, floods, and rising temperatures, which exacerbate water stresses. 
28. This subcomponent will finance TA and procurement of goods and services to: (i) strengthen collection, analyses, 
and dissemination of data on weather, climate, and surface and groundwater quality and quantity; (ii) enhance 
drought and flood early warning systems; (iii) enhance WRM planning capacities; (v) develop guidelines for catchment 
management interventions to protect water sources; and (vi) support capacity building and coordination to increase 
institutional readiness and disseminate early weather and climate warning information at the national, regional, 
woreda, and community levels.  
Subcomponent 4.B—Climate-Adaptive Service Delivery (US$60 million of which US$51.43 million equivalent is 
from IDA financing)  
29. This subcomponent will support selected woredas and urban towns in identified “hotspot” drought- and 
flood-prone areas to increase their climate resiliency. It will promote climate-adaptive approaches for WSS services 
that extend beyond local administrative boundaries, requiring tailored management arrangements. It will be 
managed by the WDC and will finance the following activities: 
i. 
Infrastructure investments, including sustainable water source development and promotion of conjunctive 
water use where possible, using boreholes, spring development, water harvesting (e.g., cisterns), 
groundwater recharge (e.g., sand dams), storage (e.g., micro-dams, tanks, etc.), installation of renewable 
energy sources (from hydropower, solar and wind), and distribution networks and water points Sanitation 
and hygiene infrastructure will be dimensioned accordingly. 
 
The World Bank 
 
One WASH—Consolidated Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Account Project (One WASH—CWA) (P167794) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 103  
     
 
ii. 
TA support to strengthen resilience planning, including: (i) improved contingency and emergency planning; 
(ii) investment preparation (feasibility and engineering designs) for climate-adaptive technologies; (iii) 
preparation of guidelines (menu of appropriate technologies, design considerations, etc.); and technical 
standards to facilitate scoping, design, and construction of climate-adaptive water supply service delivery. 
Subcomponent 4.C—Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) (US$0 million) 
30. This subcomponent will allow, on an as-needed basis, a reallocation or replenishment of the Project resources 
to woreda- and regional-level implementing agencies to address elements of an emergency response. The outline, 
the predefined framework of activities, and associated triggers that would redirect resources to support emergency 
efforts are incorporated into the POM. A CERC manual will be formally adopted by the GoE and incorporated as an 
Annex to the POM that will guide any CERC activities in the event of an emergency. 
 
31. Component 5—Institutional Strengthening and Project Management (US$25 million equivalent of which 
US$21.43 million equivalent is from IDA financing).  
Subcomponent 5.A—Operationalization of a Sector MIS (US$5 million of which US$4.29 million equivalent is from 
IDA financing) 
32. This subcomponent will support the improvement of M&E systems and activities intended to lay the 
foundation for a shift to results-based approaches in subsequent operations. It builds on the ongoing TA and 
financial support provided by the CWA DPs (the United Kingdom Department for International Development [DFID] and 
AfDB) that are financing the second National WASH Inventory, development of the MIS, and procurement of 
monitoring equipment. It will focus on the institutionalization and improvement of the National WASH Inventory and 
MIS. It will finance TA and procurement of goods and services to: (i) train, equip, and support M&E staff at regional 
and local levels; (ii) introduce remote sensing applications; (iii) further improve the system to realize real-time 
monitoring; and (iv) bring successful global experiences with information systems for rural WSS services to Ethiopia.29 
Subcomponent 5.B—Institutional Strengthening and Project Management (US$20 million of which US$17.14 
million equivalent is from IDA financing) 
33. This subcomponent will support federal, regional, and woreda implementing agencies to manage and 
supervise the proposed activities effectively. It will finance TA, procurement of goods, training and operating costs 
including: (i) capacity building and financing of additional implementation support, technical experts, and equipment; 
(ii) project management and coordination between implementing agencies; (iii) procurement and contract 
management; (iv) financial management (FM); (v) application of environmental and social safeguard instruments; 
and (vi) knowledge management and experience sharing. 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
34. The proposed Project will directly benefit approximately 3 million people through the provision of safe water 
supply services, of which 1.9 million people will also gain access to safe sanitation facilities in newly selected areas 
across the country. Out of the 3 million target beneficiaries, 1 million live in urban towns and 2 million live in rural 
areas. These beneficiaries will add to the 10.7 million people provided with access to improved WSS services as a 
result of the World Bank’s operations in the sector over the past decade.30 The Project also complements the 3.3 
million beneficiaries of improved access to WSS services in Addis Ababa and the 22 secondary cities targeted under 
the UWSSP II. The Project aims to develop and rehabilitate some 8,260 rural water supply systems in selected 
                                            
29 For example, the information system for rural WSS (SIASAR: http://www.siasar.org) that helped enhance the sustainability of the 
rural WASH interventions in various countries of Latin America, Africa, and Central Asia. 
30 Aggregated results from the Water Supply and Sanitation Project (P76735), the UWSSP (P101473), and the WASHP (P133591). 
 
The World Bank 
 
One WASH—Consolidated Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Account Project (One WASH—CWA) (P167794) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 103  
     
 
woredas, in addition to the 382 woredas supported under the WASHP. In urban areas, 180 selected small- and 
medium-sized towns will be supported with capacity building and TA and selected new towns will receive 
infrastructure investment for water supply upon meeting the readiness criteria. The Project will support WASHCOMs; 
town water utilities; and woreda, zonal, regional, and federal water, health, education, and finance offices and OWNP 
implementing agencies through enhancement of planning, budgeting, and implementation capacities. Relevant BCC 
and training material will be adapted to local languages. Furthermore, 2,800 health facilities and schools will be 
provided with advanced WASH facilities. MSEs, primarily women and youth led, will also benefit from income-
generating opportunities under the Project. 
 
 
D. Results Chain 
Issues/Challenge 
Activities 
Inputs 
Intermediate 
outcomes 
Outcomes 
Low access to safe 
water supply services 
Investment 
support to rural 
and urban water 
supply service 
improvement 
Studies and designs for improved water supply 
infrastructure development  
Functional rural and urban 
water supply schemes  
Increased access 
to safe water 
supply services 
Water source protection and development 
Construction of water supply systems (RPS) 
(reservoirs, water points, equipment, etc.) 
Construction and rehabilitation of WASH 
packages for schools and health facilities  
Provide test kits and equipment for water quality 
monitoring at source and supply 
Improved water quality 
mechanisms in place 
Provide materials and carry out awareness 
campaigns for household-level water treatment  
Low access to safe 
sanitation facilities  
Investment 
support to rural 
and urban 
sanitation 
service 
improvement 
Produce BCC materials and carry out awareness 
campaigns on sanitation and hygiene practices 
Increased demand for 
improved sanitation  
Improved 
hygiene practices 
Construct sanitation marketing centers, 
coordinate and promote business activities 
Increased availability of 
products/materials for 
improved sanitation  
Increased access 
to safe sanitation 
services 
Improve quality and management of public and 
communal latrines 
Increased capacity for 
containment, sludge 
collection, transport, and 
safe disposal 
Provide fecal sludge transport equipment 
(vacuum trucks) 
Upgrade standard design for advance sanitation 
in schools and health facilities  
Improved sanitation 
facilities for schools and 
health centers 
Construction and rehabilitation of WASH 
packages for schools and health facilities 
Limited capacity of 
WASH service 
providers results in 
lack of sustainable 
WASH schemes 
TA and 
investment 
support to build 
capacity of 
woredas and 
WASHCOMs 
Develop O&M manuals and guidelines  
Increased local capacity to 
manage WASH services 
(governance/institutional, 
financial, and technical 
capacity and women 
participation) is 
strengthened 
Improved 
functionality of 
WSS schemes 
Support development and implementation of 
Woreda WASH Strategic Plan  
Establish and strengthen community-level WASH 
management systems  
Ensure spare parts and maintenance crew for 
O&M are available 
Provide training to WWTs and WASHCOMs 
Ensure participation of women and girls in WASH 
service planning, design, and management 
TA and 
Update business plans for utilities 
Improved revenue of 
Improved 
 
The World Bank 
 
One WASH—Consolidated Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Account Project (One WASH—CWA) (P167794) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 103  
     
 
investment 
support to build 
capacity of 
utilities and 
water boards 
Support service operational improvements, 
including NRW reduction to save energy 
utilities and controlled 
expenditure 
operational 
efficiency of 
utilities  
Establish Integrated Utility MIS (billing, 
accounting, customer management, etc.)  
Train utilities and water boards  
Limited capacity for 
water resource 
planning and 
emergency responses 
TA and 
investment 
support to water 
resource 
planning and 
emergency 
response 
Establish hydromet and early warning systems 
Enhanced use of WRM 
data for climate-resilient 
WSS designs 
Increased 
resilience of WSS 
services to 
climate shocks 
Carry out water resource mapping, monitoring, 
and planning 
Implement emergency response mechanisms 
(e.g., household water storage, household water 
treatment, procurement of equipment, etc.) 
Improved capacity on 
emergency preparedness 
and response 
E. Rationale for World Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
Rationale for World Bank involvement 
35. The World Bank plays a key role in coordinating donor support to the sector and continues to leverage 
analytical and financial support to strengthen the GoE’s decentralized implementation modalities, orient policy 
shifts, and support achievements of sector targets. The World Bank provided critical contributions that enabled 
Ethiopia to meet the MDGs for water supply,31 which placed it among the small group of countries in Sub-Saharan 
Africa to do so. The World Bank has supported the GoE’s shift from project-based interventions to a multisectoral, 
program-based approach (i.e., the OWNP) and the establishment of the CWA—a harmonized funding mechanism 
with pooled financing from other DPs. Through its ongoing projects, namely the WASHP (P133591), which supports 
OWNP Phase I and the UWSSP II (P156433), the World Bank continues to be the primary financier of the sector and 
to play a pivotal role in coordinating proposed activities with parallel initiatives financed through other national 
flagship programs such as the Productive Safety Net Program (P136438), the Agriculture Growth Program (P148591), 
the proposed Lowlands Livelihood Resilience Project (P164336), the Health MDGs PforR (P160108), the General 
Education Quality Improvement Project (161377), and the Enhancing Shared Prosperity through Equitable Services 
project (151432). The World Bank is well positioned to support the GoE in meeting the GTP II and SDG targets. The 
World Bank has the leverage and convening power to mobilize additional resources from other DPs and support the 
sector in shifting to a wider focus beyond increasing access to addressing WRM and WSS service delivery. In addition 
to financing, the World Bank continues to support the sector through analytical outputs, TA, and mainstreaming 
lessons learned and best practices. 
Role of Partners  
36. Project funds will be pooled into the CWA, which is also funded by the DFID, AfDB, UNICEF, and the 
Government of Finland to jointly fund OWNP. The CWA POM is the guiding document for joint implementation and 
presents the Consolidated Results Framework. New bilateral donors are currently in the process of funneling 
resources through the CWA.32 Each DP signs a bilateral financing agreement with the GoE and funds are subsequently 
pooled into the CWA. Once allocations are confirmed from all partners, during the MTR stage, the POM and Results 
Framework will be revised to dimension additional funds and targets accordingly. The World Bank will provide 
fiduciary, safeguards and M&E oversight for all CWA-financed activities. The CWA partners will co-lead and participate 
in joint implementation review missions, CWA DPs’ coordination meetings, and CWA’s National WASH Steering 
Committee (NWSC) meetings, which are chaired by the minister of the MoWIE. In addition, to provide support 
                                            
31 Some 10.7 million people gained access to improved WSS services in Ethiopia as a result of the World Bank’s operations in the 
sector over the past decade, including the Water Supply and Sanitation Project (P076735), the UWSSP (P101473), and the WASHP 
(P133591). 
32 The Korean International Cooperation Agency has finalized its bilateral agreement with the GoE. 
 
The World Bank 
 
One WASH—Consolidated Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Account Project (One WASH—CWA) (P167794) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 103  
     
 
through the CWA, these DPs, together with other bilateral donors and international nongovernmental organizations, 
are actively supporting the sector under the WIF and targets set forth in the OWNP. Activities implemented and 
piloted at local levels have provided valuable lessons learned to be scaled up through the CWA. 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
37. Narrowly targeted investments can make inroads in addressing the water sector’s challenges but are not 
sufficient to place the sector on a sustainable path. By all measures, Ethiopia did well in the MDG era as it increased 
access to improved WSS services. However, the World Bank’s experience in both developing countries and member 
countries of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development has demonstrated that issues surrounding 
water sustainability and efficient use on an economywide basis cannot be adequately addressed under such a narrow 
policy mandate. Thus, this proposed Project seeks to enlarge the GoE’s scope of intervention through: (i) adopting a 
comprehensive sector strategy and plan (i.e., the OWNP); (ii) resolving the water quality challenge; (iii) properly 
planning WSS systems to keep service affordable; (iv) addressing financial issues in urban areas; and (v) taking the 
initial and foundational measures to combat the challenges brought about by climate change. These elements, taken 
together, represent a shift toward a culture of national integrated WRM and service delivery—the most sustainable 
approach to meeting the country’s many water sector challenges. 
38. Achieving sustainable, safe water supply requires a combination of effective investments and social measures. 
Experience in large and predominately rural countries has demonstrated that capital investments are necessary, but 
not sufficient in themselves, to provide sustainable access to safe water and adequate sanitation. For example, the 
predominant policy across the globe is to deliver water to as many households as practical through a piped system 
that is based on protected and then treated surface water, or through deep boreholes that draw from unpolluted 
aquifers. And sanitation facilities must be designed to eliminate water contamination. While this policy’s technical 
solutions are straightforward (i.e., provide the correct WSS infrastructure to deliver safe water), infrastructure 
systems frequently fall into disrepair33 and water quality slowly reaches the point where the water is no longer safe. 
In addition, experience has demonstrated that without public knowledge on how the fecal contamination chain works 
and can be broken, the negative effects of infrastructure failure quickly show up in deteriorating health indicators. 
The lesson learned is that both “hard” and “soft” investments are needed to sustain safe water supply. The proposed 
Project reflects this understanding through (i) its emphasis on water supply systems that are properly designed, that 
predominantly use boreholes, that incorporate water treatment, and that use pipes to deliver water on household 
premises when feasible; (ii) adequate source protection measures; and (iii) improved sanitation facilities that are 
designed to contain and manage excreta and fecal sludge safely. In addition, it will rehabilitate existing piped water 
systems to reduce leaks, which are sources of polluted surface water infiltration. The scale-up of scheme-level water 
quality monitoring will be strengthened and enforced to identify contaminated water sources that require attention. 
Infrastructure policy will be equally emphasized in the Project by fostering a CWIS approach, utilizing BCC, promoting 
gender equity, and building technical capacity into urban water utilities and WASHCOMs to safely manage and keep 
new water systems operating as designed. 
39. The provision of safe water supply and fecal sludge management systems is a key component of improving 
human capital. Statistical evidence from the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has shown that poor WASH services 
cause environmental enteric dysfunction, which is implicated as a cause of child stunting. This same causality and 
effect have been observed in Ethiopia, where current approaches have not yielded the intended impacts due to a 
high level of water contamination by fecal matter at the source and in potable water, linked to a high level of OD and 
                                            
33 The Ethiopian National WASH Inventory, last conducted in 2011, reported that 25 percent of water supply schemes were 
nonfunctional.