[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 51070 chars (27.1% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

1. 
This Program Paper seeks the approval of the Executive Directors to provide additional financing 
(AF) from the International Development Association (IDA) in the amount of US$55.0 million equivalent 
to the Ethiopia General Education Quality Improvement Program for Equity (GEQIP-E) (P163050). The AF 
will also be supported by a US$4.9 million Grant from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark to the 
existing General Education Quality Improvement Program for Equity Multi-Donor Trust Fund (GEQIP-E 
MDTF); and a US$19.6 million Grant from the Global Partnership for Education (GPE) Multiplier.1 Of the 
IDA Grant, US$50.0 million would come from the IDA 19 Window for Host Communities and Refugees.  
2. 
The proposed AF will scale up the Program to additional schools in the following geographic 
regions serving refugee populations: Afar, Benishangul-Gumuz, Gambella, Somali, and Tigray. 
Specifically, the AF will (i) introduce updated institutional frameworks for effective integration of refugees 
into national education service provision; (ii) increase capacity for planning and coordination of refugee 
education; (iii) scale up selected existing activities and incentives to harmonize government systems to 
deliver quality education to refugee communities; (iv) introduce new activities to address challenges in 
refugee education, particularly to promote gender equity and recovery of COVID-19 related learning loss; 
(v) support the transition of refugee camp-based secondary schools, currently managed by non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) under the auspices of the Agency for Refugee and Returnee Affairs 
(ARRA)2, to national administration by Regional Education Bureaus (REBs) under the auspices of the 
Ministry of Education (MoE); and (vi) provide support to existing REB schools hosting large numbers of 
refugees to increase capacity and support integration of refugees students. 
3. 
A first AF to GEQIP-E (P170943), approved on 2 March 2021, provides US$122.5 million from 
GPE to fill key gaps not addressed by GEQIP-E; scale up successful interventions; strengthen parent 
Program performance through capacity building and improved environmental and social (E&S) 
management and procurement systems; and build resilience of the education system to withstand 
shocks such as COVID-19. This second  AF is intended to expand the scope of the program to an additional 
population, refugees, as part of a long-term process of integration of refugees into national educaion 
systems. 
4. 
Ethiopia has the second largest population of refugees in Africa, with more than 790,000 
refugees, approximately 484,000 of school age, and is a pilot country for the Comprehensive Refugee 
Response Framework (CRRF).3 Ethiopia has succeeded in providing schooling to a significant proportion 
of these refugee children, but access remains lower than in the host community. Ethiopia is a signatory to 
the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, and as part of CRRF the Government is committed 
to significantly increasing the access of refugees to education.  
 
1 Not including Grant Agent supervision fees of US$0.4 million from GPE and US$0.1 million from DANIDA 
2 Until November 2018, ARRA was known as the Administration for Refugee and Returnee Affairs. 
3 792,030 total refugees (and asylum seekers) as of September 2020 (United Nations High Commission for 
Refugees, UNHCR). 483,653 of school age (3-18 years) in June 2019 (Ministry of Education, Educational Statistics 
Annual Abstract (ESAA), 2018/19). The population has decreased from more than 900,000 in August 2018. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to GEQIP-E for Refugees Integration (P168411) 
 
 
 
 
 
April 16, 2021 
Page 10 of 174 
 
5. 
Ethiopia has also committed to a long-term agenda of integration of refugee education into 
national systems. Refugee issues have historically been viewed from a humanitarian perspective, with 
responsibilities for management of refugees fulfilled by ARRA with program financing from UNHCR. The 
majority of refugees study in camp-based schools under the auspices of ARRA; these schools have 
operated largely independent of MoE, with parallel systems of management, staffing and service 
delivery.4 These institutional arrangements isolate refugee schools from the specialist education expertise 
and technical capacity of MoE, REBs and woreda (district) education officials,5 and refugee schools have 
inconsistent access to services provided by MoE such as teacher training, school grants, inspections and 
supervision.  
6. 
Under the New York Declaration, the Government has committed to deliver support to refugees 
through national and local public providers for education, health, social services and child protection.67 
Education has been selected as the first sector to lead this process of services harmonization. The 
proposed AF is the first innovative, systematic approach in Ethiopia intended to institutionalize and 
strengthen service provision for refugees and initiate a transition away from dependence on 
unpredictable humanitarian finance to conventional government and development partner financing; and 
from parallel, duplicated systems, towards service provision integrated with national systems and 
budgets. 
7. 
The AF will also extend to refugees the scope of activities to address the impacts of COVID-19 
in education. The first case of COVID-19 was recorded in Ethiopia on March 13, 2020  and as of February 
28, 2021 there were 156,112 confirmed cases8 and 2,321 confirmed deaths from the disease. A state of 
emergency was declared on April 8, 2020. The disruption and loss of livelihood resulting from the 
pandemic has exacerbated existing strains resulting from the refugee and internally displaced person (IDP) 
crises. The Government of Ethiopia’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic involved the indefinite closure 
of all schools, including refugee schools, on March 15, 2020, impacting more than 26 million students. 
MoE has prepared a COVID-19 Emergency Response Plan (CERP) detailing a number of strategies to 
support learning during the period of school closure; help reduce incidence of COVID-19 by raising 
awareness and keeping children at home; establish the conditions for safe reopening of schools; and 
support recovery of the education system as schools reopen. These activities are supported by the 
US$14.85 million GPE COVID-19 Education Response Project (P174206); as well as the first AF to GEQIP-
E. This AF will provide additional support to extend these and other mitigation activities to refugee 
schools. 
8. 
The AF will maintain the Program for Results (PforR) modality of GEQIP-E, with a component of 
Investment Project Financing (IPF) to support targeted capacity building. The successful integration of 
refugee education will require efforts at national, regional and woreda levels to establish modes of 
 
4 At secondary level, refugee schools are operated by NGOs under ARRA oversight. See below. 
5 Wales, J., Khan, A., and Nicolai, S. 2020. “Strengthening the knowledge base for education in emergencies 
practitioners and partners: Ethiopia Case Study.” London: Overseas Development Institute. 
6 United Nations General Assembly. 2016. “71/1. New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants.” Resolution 
adopted by the General Assembly on 19 September 2016. 
7 The GoE made additional pledges during the first Global Refugee Forum in December 2019, including its focus on 
providing quality and accredited skills training to refugees and hosts. 
8 0.015 percent of population 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to GEQIP-E for Refugees Integration (P168411) 
 
 
 
 
 
April 16, 2021 
Page 11 of 174 
 
collaboration for effective coordination and field-level implementation of activities supported by the AF. 
The proposed US$59.5 million PforR component will provide high-powered incentives to carry out 
necessary policy and institutional reforms to establish a sustainable framework for refugee education; to 
overcome local-level obstacles to extend MoE services to refugee primary schools; to transition secondary 
schools to MoE administration; and to implement targeted activities to address key challenges of access 
and quality faced by school-age children in host and refugee populations. In addition, the program will 
include a US$20 million component of IPF Technical Assistance (TA) to build institutional and technical 
capacity for harmonization and integration of refugee education.

9. 
The Government has requested further AF to GEQIP-E to extend the benefits of the program to 
refugee education and support the integration of refugee education into national systems of service 
delivery. The original program, GEQIP-E, aims to improve internal efficiency, equitable access, and quality 
in general education (O-Class to Grade 12). GEQIP-E supports part of the Government’s Education Sector 
Development Programme (ESDP) V (2015/16-2019/20)9. The program was approved on 19 December 
2017 and is funded by an IDA grant of US$300 million and US$150 million from the GEQIP-E MDTF 
(TF072991), which receives contributions from the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office 
(FCDO), Finland’s Ministry for Foreign Affairs, United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Norway’s Ministry 
for Foreign Affairs, and Denmark’s Royal Ministry of Foreign Affairs; as well as counterpart financing of 
US$847.7 million equivalent. It became effective on  December 21, 2017 and had an original closing date 
of  July 7, 2022. The first AF of US$122.5 million from the Global Partnership for Education (GPE) is 
currently awaiting Effectiveness and will extend the closing date to July 7, 2024, as well as introducing 
additional activities, capacity building and scaling up of successful interventions.  
10. 
Ethiopia’s basic education system has made rapid progress in recent years, but challenges 
remain. A child born in Ethiopia will be 38 percent as productive as an adult as she could be if she enjoyed 
complete education and full health, according to the World Bank’s Human Capital Index, in which the 
country ranks 135th out of 157 countries.10 As of 2018/19, while 89 percent of enrolled students complete 
grade 5, the primary completion rate (PCR) of students completing grade 8 is only 62.1 percent.11 In 
learning-adjusted years, which consider both attainment and learning, an Ethiopian child can expect to 
complete only 4.5 years of learning.12 This overall performance masks significant inequity: only 60 percent 
of female students complete grade 8, versus 64 percent of boys.13 Issues of equity are particularly severe 
in several emerging regions, home to Ethiopia’s pastoralist communities. While 80 percent of enrolled 
students in Addis Ababa survive to grade 5, the proportion in Gambella and Afar regions, for example, 
were 49 percent and 29 percent respectively, as of 2016/17.14 These disparities reflect inequities in service 
provision, with levels of textbooks, classrooms and staffing per student varying considerably between 
regions.   
 
9 ESDP VI (2020/21-2024/25) is currently being finalized. 
10 World Bank, 2018. “Ethiopia”. Available at: 
https://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/hci/HCI_2pager_ETH.pdf. Accessed: 29th December, 2018. 
11 MoE, Education Statistics Annual Abstract (ESAA), 2018/19. 
12 World Bank, 2018. “Ethiopia”. 
13 ESAA, 2017/18. 
14 ESAA, 2016/17. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to GEQIP-E for Refugees Integration (P168411) 
 
 
 
 
 
April 16, 2021 
Page 12 of 174 
 
11. 
To address these limitations, the ESDP V identifies three priorities for the basic education 
sector: (i) capacity development for improved management; (ii) general education quality; and (iii) 
general education access, equity, and internal efficiency. Implementation of these priority reform areas 
is carried out by MoE and supported by GEQIP-E through a range of interconnected reforms including 
enhancements to quality assurance and inspections; improvements in the distribution of grants to 
schools; development of a new strategic framework for teacher training and development; and a new 
school-based program for teachers’ professional development. 
12. 
At primary level, access to education for refugees is improving, but remains behind that of the 
host population. Ethiopia’s main refugee-hosting regions15 include 194,234 refugees of primary school 
age (7-14 years); 97,741 of these are enrolled in school. The total enrollment in refugee primary schools 
is 130,626, an overall GER of 67 percent, reflecting large over-age enrollment.16 This represents a 
significant improvement from the 2016/17 GER of 62 percent,17 but nonetheless contrasts poorly with the 
national GER of 105 percent for Ethiopian children. Refugee primary students18 attend a network of 61 
specialized refugee primary schools, located within refugee camps. Of these, the majority are in Gambella 
region, and the Dollo Ado area of Somali region, the largest refugee-hosting areas. Refugee primary 
schools are operated by ARRA19 and entirely financed by UNHCR; they employ curricula and standards 
aligned with those of MoE/REB schools but are staffed by ARRA-employed teachers and managed by ARRA 
officials.20 
13. 
Despite considerable investment, refugee primary schools face overcrowding and severe 
limitations of staffing, leading to low rates of primary completion. The average refugee camp primary 
school has more than 2,000 students. Many primary refugee schools implement double shifts and most 
refugee schools provide only 3-4 hours of teaching and learning per day. Pupil-teacher ratios (PTR) in 
refugee primary schools are more than double those in REB schools (82:1 versus 39:1)21. Approximately 
69 percent of teachers in refugee schools are recruited from refugee communities and paid a limited 
 
15 More than 750,000 of Ethiopia’s refugees live within the five main refugee-hosting regions (see Annex 2, 
Technical Assessment – Addendum), almost exclusively in camps. Four of the five regions – Afar, Benishangul-
Gumuz, Gambella, and Somali – are considered emerging regions, with particular challenges in terms of economy 
and service delivery, while the fifth, Tigray, has been subject to fighting between national and local armed forces 
since November 2020. Refugees are housed in and around a network of 26 camps, operated by ARRA. 
Approximately 35,000 refugees reside outside of camps in other regions. These refugees use mainstream schools 
and are considered beneficiaries of the parent GEQIP-E program; they are not targeted by this AF. 
16 ESAA, 2018/19 
17 ESAA, 2016/17 
18 Refugees living in or near camps attend ARRA schools; a negligible number (fewer than 100) camp-based 
refugees are believed to be attending REB primary schools.  
19 Of the 61 refugee primary schools, 56 are directly operated by ARRA, while five are operated by Plan 
International under contract with ARRA; these are expected to transfer to Government operation during the AF.  
20 While national MoE education management is organized primarily at regional and woreda levels, ARRA employs 
zone (sub-region)-level coordination, further exacerbating disconnections and problems of coordination between 
the two systems. 
21 ESAA, 2018/19 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to GEQIP-E for Refugees Integration (P168411) 
 
 
 
 
 
April 16, 2021 
Page 13 of 174 
 
stipend in lieu of salary22; these ‘refugee incentive’ teachers, who are commonly employed in lower 
primary, often have limited training in teaching methods or the Ethiopian curriculum. The result is that 
only 46 percent of teachers in refugee primary schools have minimum qualifications to teach at primary 
school level23, in comparison to 90 percent of teachers in mainstream schools.24 Shortages of 
infrastructure and teaching and learning materials in refugee camp schools are also severe.25 As a result 
of these quality challenges, the primary completion rate for refugee children in 2017/18 was just 22 
percent, versus 58 percent in the general population, meaning that refugee children are less than half as 
likely to complete primary school.26 
14. 
At secondary level, access for refugees remains significantly more challenging. 78,512 refugees 
in the main refugee regions are of secondary school age (15-18), of which only 10,029 are in refugee 
secondary schools. A further 1,300 refugees living in camps attend government schools near camps, 
typically in locations where these are the nearest secondary schools available.27 The overall secondary 
GER for refugees is 12.8 percent28, which contrasts poorly to the situation among Ethiopian children, for 
whom the secondary GER is 32.0 percent. A significant proportion of secondary school-age children not 
enrolled in secondary school are still in primary school, where over-age enrollment is large.29 
15. 
At secondary levels, ARRA is not engaged in direct management of schools. The majority of 
refugees attending secondary schools attend one of 13 dedicated refugee secondary schools operated by 
NGOs; the primary role is played by the Ethiopian Orthodox Church Development and Inter-Church Aid 
Commission (EOC-DICAC), which operates 12 schools, with one additional school operated by World 
Vision International (WVI). In addition to refugees, approximately 2,100 students from host communities 
attend these refugee secondary schools, primarily in communities where it is the nearest secondary 
school available.  
16. 
 Gender disparities in refugee education are large and worsening. The primary gender parity 
index (GPI) for refugees in the major regions in 2018/19 was 0.64, down from 0.71 in 2016/17 and 0.69 in 
2017/18;30 and only 12 percent of refugee girls complete primary school, versus 30 percent of boys (and 
56 percent of girls in the general population).31 Fewer than eight percent of refugee primary school 
teachers – 166 out of 2236 – are female, exacerbating gender disparities in participation and learning as 
 
22 As of September 2020, there were 1574 such ‘refugee incentive’ teachers (of which 135 female) and 692 
Ethiopian teachers (of which 31 female) employed by ARRA and Plan International in refugee camp primary 
schools (UNHCR) 
23 All national teachers working in refugee primary schools have minimum qualifications, along with 356 out of 
1574 refugee incentive teachers (UNHCR). 
24 ESAA, 2018/19 
25 Owing to classroom shortages, pupil-classroom ratios in refugee schools are high, an average of 101 in 2018/19, 
rising to as high as 150 in Gambella region. ESAA, 2018/19 
26 ESAA, 2018/19 
27 This does not include refugees living out-of-camp in Addis Ababa or elsewhere, who attend mainstream schools 
and are outside the scope of this project. 
28 ESAA, 2018/19. Does not include refugees enrolled in Government schools. 
29 Kimetrica, 2018. 
30 ESAA, 2018/19; 2017/18; 2016/17 
31 ESAA, 2017/18 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to GEQIP-E for Refugees Integration (P168411) 
 
 
 
 
 
April 16, 2021 
Page 14 of 174 
 
a result of a lack of role models for girls.32 The GER in upper secondary (grades 11-12) for refugee girls was 
just 3.3 percent in 2018/19. 
17. 
The Government is committed to significantly increasing the access of refugees to education. 
The Government announced nine pledges to support CRRF;33 among these, it pledged to make education 
available to all qualified refugees from primary to tertiary level, without discrimination and within the 
available resources. As an initial step, the Government set a target of increasing refugee primary 
enrollment by 17 percent, which was achieved in 2017/18; and secondary enrollment by 89 percent, 
which was achieved in 2018/19.34  
18. 
The Government has committed to a long-term vision of integration of refugees into 
mainstream national systems of work, society and service delivery. As part of CRRF, the Government has 
adopted a ten-year vision to “gradually transform Ethiopia’s refugee operation approach and model from 
encampment towards hosting refugees in village-style development-oriented settlements and other 
alternatives”.35 These efforts are supported by revisions to Ethiopia’s Refugee Proclamation, the law 
establishing the legal rights and status of refugees. The revised law, adopted by Parliament on January 17, 
201936, grants new rights to refugees to obtain work permits, open bank accounts, and register births, 
marriages and deaths, and establishes a legal right for refugees to access primary education at the same 
level of access as Ethiopian citizens, and secondary and tertiary education within available resources. 
19. 
In the medium term, the Government aims to move provision of services to refugees away from 
parallel systems towards an integrated model, with service delivery overseen by mainstream national 
Ministries and local-level officials. Ethiopia, along with the other members of the Intergovernmental 
Authority of Development (IGAD), is also a signatory to the Djibouti Declaration on Refugee Education, 
which commits countries to integrate refugees into national education policies, strategies, programs and 
plans of action.37 The implementation of CRRF will be supported by a National Comprehensive Refugee 
Response Strategy (NCRRS), currently awaiting approval by the Ethiopia’s Council of Ministers; the NCRRS 
will be a guiding document for a whole-of government approach enhancing improved access to services, 
including education, and self-reliance and resilience for refugees and host communities, and is expected 
to progressively enhance the capacity and responsibility of MoE (REBs/woredas) to include refugees in 
 
32 UNHCR. 2020. Correspondence.  
33 In addition to education, the Government has made pledges under CRRF with regard to expansion of the out-of-
camp policy; provision of work permits and livelihoods; documentation; social and basic services; and local 
integration. For details, see Technical Assessment, Annex 2. 
34 The Government’s target is to increase primary refugee enrollment to 137,000 and secondary refugee 
enrollment to 10,300. In 2017/18, primary enrollment was 147,630; however, it fell to 130,626 in 2018/19 in 
response to a fall in the school-age refugee population. Refugee enrollment in refugee secondary schools in 
2018/19 was 10,029; in addition, approximately 1,300 refugee students attend host community secondary schools, 
exceeding the target. Sources: (ESAA, 2017/18; 2018/19) 
35 Administration for Refugee and Returnee Affairs. 2017. “Roadmap for the implementation of the Federal 
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Government Pledges and the Practical Application of the CRRF in Ethiopia.” Addis 
Ababa: Administration for Refugee and Returnee Affairs. 
36 Proclamation no.1110/2019, gazetted 27th February, 2019. 
37 Intergovernmental Authority on Development. 2017. “Djibouti Declaration on Regional Conference on Refugee 
Education in IGAD Member States.” 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to GEQIP-E for Refugees Integration (P168411) 
 
 
 
 
 
April 16, 2021 
Page 15 of 174 
 
REB schools and gradually absorb previous camp-based school infrastructure. However, the progress on 
operationalization of these high-level commitments was initially slow.  
20. 
The AF will support the harmonization of service delivery in refugee schools for key services, as 
well as integration of refugee schools and communities with national school management and host 
communities at secondary level. MoE and ARRA signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) in April 
2019 establishing roles and responsibilities for this process, which will be operationalized through the AF 
(see Box 1). To rationalize delivery of services, the MoU should be supported by detailed policy and 
institutional guidance to place responsibility for delivery within MoE and establish clear principles and 
processes of collaboration between MoE, ARRA, and other stakeholders. The AF supports the 
development of these institutional frameworks through foundational Disbursement-Linked Results 
(DLRs), and required capacity building to support the implementation of these frameworks through the 
IPF Component. 
21. 
There is also a need to support schools in host communities which host large numbers of 
refugees. Approximately 1,300 refugee camp-based students currently attend REB schools, primarily at 
secondary level, with impacts on enrollments and availability of facilities. In order to achieve 
improvements in access to secondary education by refugees, there is a need to rapidly increase the 
capacity of REB secondary schools to meet the needs of refugee students. The proposed AF will provide 
additional support to schools hosting large proportions of refugee students, to meet the resulting 
additional needs for infrastructure and to support activities aimed at integrating refugee students into 
REB schools. 
22. 
In addition, there is a need to address challenges specific to refugee education, both in refugee 
schools and in REB schools in host communities. Large class sizes, underqualified refugee incentive 
teachers, and the existence of a range of language backgrounds, combined with the social, psychological 
and emotional impacts of displacement, contribute to low levels of learning and progression to upper 
grades in refugee schools.  To address these challenges, along with gender disparities, the program will 
support activities in the areas of information and communication technology (ICT)-supported self-directed 
learning and girls’ empowerment. 
23. 
Investments are required in capacity for refugee education at national and regional levels. 
Despite the establishment under the 2009 and 2013 circulars of responsibilities for MoE and REB for 
refugee education, there remains no dedicated capacity within MoE, or REBs, for coordination and 
management of services in refugee schools. In order to ensure the necessary collaboration to enable 
delivery of harmonized activities to refugee schools, there is also a need for dedicated capacity for refugee 
education within REBs, to provide technical and strategic leadership and to lead coordination between 
REBs and ARRA, UNHCR, NGOs, and other key stakeholders.  
24. 
Humanitarian finance is supporting measures to address the COVID-19 pandemic for refugees, 
but additional support is required to address loss of learning. There is also an urgent need for investment 
to prevent COVID-19 resurgence in schools. Preventing a recurrence of COVID-19 once refugee schools 
reopen will require improvements in water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) facilities and practices at 
schools, as well as provision of health and personal protective equipment. Education Cannot Wait (ECW, 
a partnership between MoE, ARRA, UNICEF, UNHCR and Save the Children) has made available USS$2.8 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to GEQIP-E for Refugees Integration (P168411) 
 
 
 
 
 
April 16, 2021 
Page 16 of 174 
 
million38 to support distance learning for refugee students during the closure of schools, and the 
reopening of schools in refugee camps through provision of water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) and 
health materials, and support to teachers in COVID-19 prevention and psychosocial support. However, 
 
38 COVID 19 First Emergency Response Phase II. US$1.68 million is managed by UNHCR and implemented in 
partnership with ARRA; the remainder is managed and implemented by the NGOs Save the Children and Plan 
International. 
Box 1. Recent progress in early stage harmonization of MoU between MoE and ARA 
 
While refugee schools are operated under the auspices of ARRA, in recent years, a number of policy 
arrangements have been made for provision of key services to refugee schools by MoE. A 2009 circular* codifies 
the right of refugee students to access host community schools.  Under a 2013 circular** , MoE committed to 
include teachers in refugee schools in pre- and in-service training; provide support for supervision and inspection 
of refugee schools; provide textbooks and learning materials; and include refugee schools in national examinations 
and learning assessments. Collaboration between ARRA and MoE, REBs and woredas has been strengthened in 
recent years in order to enable the implementation of these policies, but challenges remain, particularly in regard 
to access to camps for MoE, REB and woreda officials. Efforts to provide grants to schools, mirroring those 
supported by GEQIP-E in REB schools, have so far been unsuccessful as a result of a lack of clear institutional 
arrangements for funds flow to refugee schools, the majority of which lack bank accounts. 
 
The MoU between the MoE and ARRA sets out core areas of cooperation and roles and responsibilities for 
provision of equitable and inclusive education for school-age refugees. The MoU is intended to combine and 
supersede the existing collaboration arrangements with a comprehensive and clear set of institutional boundaries. 
The final document includes commitments by MoE to provide services to refugee schools including provision of 
textbooks and learning materials and distribution of school grants. In addition, the MoU includes a range of 
commitments regarding teaching staff, including accreditation of the qualifications of refugee teachers; increased 
supply of qualified national teachers to refugee schools; licensing of national teachers working in refugee schools; 
and training for national teachers on refugee education.  
 
Some aspects of collaboration between MoE and ARRA are already under implementation. Refugee schools have 
been included in a limited form in EMIS since 2016/17. MoE, through REBs, is providing placement exams for 
refugee students and have included the majority of refugee schools in assessments against national quality 
standards. Selected refugee teachers have received training at national Colleges of Teachers’ Education. This early-
stage collaboration between MoE/REBs and ARRA has depended on extensive financial and technical humanitarian 
and project support from donors. The primary support has been from two donor-supported programs: ECW and 
Building Self-Reliance of Refugee and Vulnerable Host Communities (BSRP, financed by FCDO) for both of which 
UNICEF is lead implementer. In addition to supporting EMIS data collection, teacher training, placement 
examinations and school assessments, UNICEF, through BSRP and ECW, has supported this process through 
capacity building of REB and woreda education officials; arrangement of joint planning workshops bringing ARRA 
and REBs together at the regional level. 
 
* Education Circular, Ref 11/1-3456/1098/35. Refugees of school age can enroll in REB schools on presentation 
of refugee identification; school papers from countries of origin are required to be recognized and the students 
placed in an appropriate class, while REBs are expected to provide placement examinat

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

ities and Refugees, stressing the importance of 
supporting both refugees and their host communities and establishing a basis for sustainable provis-ET. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to GEQIP-E for Refugees Integration (P168411) 
 
 
 
 
 
April 16, 2021 
Page 18 of 174 
 
29. 
Over the last three decades, Ethiopia has had no history of systemic or systematic refoulement 
or denial of access to territory and has had practices broadly consistent with the international refugee 
protection standards. The revised Refugee Proclamation provides enhanced rights for refugees to work, 
acquire property, and access education, health and justice services. Procedures for recognition of refugee 
status generally adhere to international standards, and the new Refugee Proclamation includes 
recognition of sur place refugee claims; persons with specific needs or protection risks are prioritized. 
However, protection issues persist, notably inter- and intra-ethnic tension, particularly in the Gambella 
region, and significant incidence of gender-based violence, sexual exploitation and abuse (GBV/SEA), early 
marriage, and harmful traditional practices (HTP). Protection interventions by humanitarian partners have 
been significantly affected by the COVID-19 crisis with the closure of Child, Youth and Women-Friendly 
Spaces, scaled-down/adjusted GBV/SEA prevention and response measures. The recent events in Tigray 
have also created new and pressing concerns with regards to the situation of refugees in this part of the 
country. UNHCR is working closely with the Ethiopian authorities to respond to humanitarian needs in 
Tigray and to relocate displaced refugees in the two remaining camps. UNHCR has proposed to delay 
providing a comprehensive and updated protection assessment to allow for evidence gathering on the 
ground and after concluding critical aspects of its dialogue with authorities. At the same time, with respect 
to existing or proposed IDA-financed projects in Ethiopia, UNHCR suggested the Bank to rely on the 
assessment provided in August 2020, which had found the protection framework to be adequate. 
30. 
The AF will support the GoE’s policy of increasing access to quality education by refugees as 
defined in its pledges to support CRRF. It will also lay the groundwork for a longer-term process of 
harmonization and integration of refugee education into MoE, and initiate the transition of secondary 
refugee education entirely to MoE administration. This approach is aligned with the principles of the IDA 
19 Window for Host Communities and Refugees, stressing the importance of supporting both refugees 
and their host communities and establishing a basis for sustainable provision of services through 
integration into national systems. It will also lay the groundwork for a longer-term process of 
harmonization and integration of refugee education into MoE, and initiate the transition of secondary 
refugee education entirely to MoE administration. In the long term, such harmonization and integration 
provide the most sustainable solution to ensure equitable levels of service. This reform agenda is also 
supported by a number of other World Bank-financed projects and programs (Box 2). 
B. Parent Program Performance  
31. 
GEQIP-E performance was initially strong but then encountered several challenges. The Program 
was off to a good start with US$61.2 million disbursed for prior results and advances within the first eight 
months. In late 2018, however, the Program started witnessing implementation delays with mixed 
progress in terms of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) due to sporadic conflicts and violence across the 
country which disrupted schooling and adversely affected data collection and administration of the 
Program in the regions, and the lack of staffing both at the central and regional levels. With the lack of 
staffing delaying the implementation of key actions under the Program Action Plan (PAP), fiduciary and 
E&S systems ratings were downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU) in May 2019. Mixed progress 
in KPIs and significant lag in disbursements resulted in MU ratings for the program development objective 
(PDO), Implementation Progress (IP) and Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) in December 2019. In 
response, actions have been taken to address implementation bottlenecks, revise the Program design and 
strengthen accountability for results. These actions include completing the restructuring of the Program 
in April 2020, filling the majority of vacant staffing positions, and verifying the completion of Year 1 DLRs. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to GEQIP-E for Refugees Integration (P168411) 
 
 
 
 
 
April 16, 2021 
Page 19 of 174 
 
The restructuring of the Program clarified roles and responsibilities and provided incentives for regions to 
achieve the Program objectives; it made DLRs scalable and proportional to the achievement level, thereby 
supporting the availability of funding for priority interventions each school year; and it also recalibrated 
the results framework and DLIs in line with the implementation reality, while keeping the ambitious 
trajectory of the Program. 
32. 
GEQIP-E restructuring improved Program implementation. The restructuring in April 2020 
improved Program implementation, and disbursements increased to US$224.38 million equivalent as of 
April 2021 (of which US$175 million equivalent IDA and US$49 million from GEQIP-E MDTF). Four of eleven 
Year 2 DLRs progressed well but have not been fully achieved due to school closures brought about by 
COVID-19. The timeline for these four DLIs will be extended as part of the proposed AF to allow their 
attainment. With the actions taken above, implementation improved and in May 2020 the ratings for PDO 
and IP were upgraded to ‘Moderately Satisfactory’, as well as the ratings on E&S systems and DLI. The 
fiduciary rating remains at ‘Moderately Unsatisfactory’ until key conditions for upgrading and 
procurement staffing are met. Approval was granted to proceed with the AF by Regional Vice President 
on July 29, 2020. 
33. 
The first AF to GEQIP-E includes a range of measure to strengthen performance of the parent 
program. The AF will incentivize procurement and E&S compliance with the new DLRs. In addition, 
increased attention will be given to capacity building of new personnel recruited to provide technical 
support to regions and woredas for implementation of Program activities including monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E), through the IPF component.  
Box 2. World Bank Support to Responses to Forced Displacement in Ethiopia 
 
o 
Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project (DRDIP, P152822) US$100 million. DRDIP is ongoing 
and aims to improve access to basic social services, expand economic opportunities, and enhance environmental 
management for communities hosting refugees.  
o 
Economic Opportunities Program (EOP, P163829) US$202 million. The EOP is part of the Jobs Compact and 
aims to provide economic opportunities for Ethiopians and refugees in an environmentally and socially sustainable 
way.  
o 
Urban Productive Safety Net and Jobs Project (UPSNJP, P169943) US$400 million. The UPSNJP aims to 
include refugees and host communities in the existing urban safety net program and facilitate refugees’ 
socioeconomic integration in selected geographic locations. 
o 
Analytical studies of socio-economic integration for refugees; the socio-economic sustainability of refugee 
hosting areas; the impact of refugees on host areas; and support to implementation planning for the CRRF 
process, as part of regional Support to operationalizing forced displacement program in Ethiopia, Kenya and 
Uganda (P167196). 
o 
Thematic studies of Reproductive health in refugee hosting areas (P169709); and Education for Refugees 
and Resilience (P168829); as well as analysis of fragility for refugees and internally displaced persons as part of a 
study on Vulnerability and Resilience in the Ethiopian lowlands (P167268). 
o 
Flexible and on-demand capacity building, including support to ARRA in the form of a development advisor; 
Support for development of the Regional Action Plans in the form of public finance, education and 
communications specialists; and Learning events and trainings.  
o 
Participation as an advisor to the Steering Committee for CRRF and in coordination mechanisms such as the 
Forced Displacement Donor Coordination and Refugee Coordination Groups, in addition to participation in 
sectoral coordination mechanisms. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to GEQIP-E for Refugees Integration (P168411) 
 
 
 
 
 
April 16, 2021 
Page 20 of 174

34. 
The main changes proposed by the AF include: (i) expansion of the scope of the original 
Government program to include refugee education; (ii) addition of new intermediate indicators and DLIs 
relating to refugee education; (iii) update of the PAP based on past implementation experience and 
lessons learned; (iv) strengthening the E&S management system through revised PAP and Environmental 
and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP); and (v) extension of the closing date by nine months to allow for 
completion of new activities.  
35. 
Program Scope: The AF will extend the scope of GEQIP-E to refugee students and support the 
harmonization of key services for refugee primary schools into MoE/REB systems of service delivery; 
transfer of refugee secondary schools from NGO to MoE/REB administration; integration of refugee 
students attending MoE/REB secondary schools; and provision of innovative activities to support 
empowerment of refugee girls, and self-directed learning for COVID-19 recovery.  
36. 
Program Development Objective (PDO): The PDO of the original program, to improve internal 
efficiency, equitable access, and quality in general education (O-Class to Grade 12), will be maintained.  
37. 
Results framework and DLIs. The results framework will be modified to include three new DLIs 
and associated indicators.41 In the first year of the AF, foundational DLR targets support the establishment 
of institutional frameworks to establish detailed procedures and principles of collaboration between MoE, 
ARRA and other stakeholders to achieve harmonization of services and secondary school integration.42 
The AF will then support harmonization of a package of key services, integration of secondary schools, as 
well as innovations to improve learning and ease the integration of refugee students into host community 
secondary schools, leading ultimately to greater equity of service provision (Figure 2).  
38. 
 Implementation arrangements. The AF will be overseen by a National Refugee Education 
Steering Committee, established as a sub-committee of the GEQIP-E Program Steering Committee within 
 
41 Owing to issues of relevance and measurement, the existing RF indicators will not be amended to include 
refugee schools; however, refugee schools transferred to MoE ownership during the program will automatically 
come into the purview of these indicators with no modification required. 
42 Although the exact specifications of the Institutional Frameworks will vary according to the specific DLR/activity, 
it is expected that each will include: precisely demarcated roles and responsibilities for MoE, REB, WEO, ARRA and 
other organization officials, for implementation, oversight and monitoring of activities; rules and regulations 
relating to access to camps and schools by MoE, REB, WEO and other officials to complete required activities; flow 
of funds, where relevant; and codification of all other decisions and guidance required for completion of activities. 
Figure 2. Phased structure of AF 
 
2021/22 
2022/23 – 2024/25 
IPF 
Coordination of refugee education (National and Regional Sub-Units) 
Regional and national plans 
Capacity building 
PforR 
Institutional frameworks; costed 
implementation plans 
Harmonization of services at primary schools 
Integration of secondary education 
Innovation activities 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to GEQIP-E for Refugees Integration (P168411) 
 
 
 
 
 
April 16, 2021 
Page 21 of 174 
 
MoE, co-chaired by the State Minister of MoE, the Director of ARRA, and a representative of MoF, with 
representation from the Development Assistance Group Education Sector Technical Working Group 
(ETWG), UNHCR, UNICEF, and other key stakeholders, as well as from REBs for the main refugee-hosting 
regions; and at regional level, by Regional Refugee Education Steering Committees, co-chaired by REBs 
and ARRA, with participation from Bureaus of Finance and Economic Development (BoFEDs). Day-to-day 
management of the AF will be carried out by a National Refugee Integration Sub-Unit, established within 
the existing GEQIP-E Program Coordination Office (PCO) at MoE. Regional Refugee Integration Sub-Units, 
established within REBs, will oversee regional- and woreda-level implementation. 
39. 
Program Action Plan. The Program Action Plan (PAP) is updated to reflect completion of items, 
and new Program items specific to the AF, including: (i) holding of regular coordination meetings between 
REBs, woredas, ARRA, and other stakeholders at woreda level; inclusion of full data for refugee schools in 
EMIS and Standards Assessments; and incorporation of Ethiopian national teachers working in ARRA-
administered schools onto REB payrolls; as well as additional items relating to environmental and social 
safeguards. See Annex 5 for modified PAP. 
40. 
 Environmental and Social Framework. The World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework 
(ESF) applies to the IPF Component of the AF. In addition to an updated Environmental and Social Systems 
Assessment (ESSA), disclosed on March 22, 2021, an Environmental and Social Review Summary has been 
prepared along with an accompanying ESCP, Stakeholder Engagement Plan and Labour Management 
Procedures, to address the risks identified, and these were disclosed on March 17, 2021. In addition, 
specific risk assessments relating to the three pilot activities under the IPF component will be conducted 
in the first year of the AF. The ESCP and Stakeholder Engagement Plan include site-specific plans for 
engagement of schools, teachers, host communities, refugees, parents, and female and vulnerable 
students. The Labour Management Plan identifies key risks relating to Labour under the AF, including 
inadequate remuneration, excessive working hours, and issues relating to Occupational Health and Safety 
(OHS) and accidents; the Plan outlines the relevant national legislation and policies which will apply for 
workers under the AF, including entitlement to at least 24 hours’ rest each week, restrictions on 
deductions in wages, rights to paid annual leave and sick pay, and benefits in the event of on-the-job 
injury, and mandates the inclusion of employment issues for employees including civil servants, teachers 
and staff of contracted civil society organisations in the remit of the AF Grievance Redress Mechanism 
(GRM). 
A. Program for Results Component (DLIs) 
41. 
Three new DLIs are introduced, supporting harmonization of refugee primary schools with MoE 
and REB services, and integration of secondary schools. (For more detailed description of DLIs, including 
alignment with GPE Variable Part dimensions, see Annex 6). 
DLI 11. Harmonization of services at refugee primary schools (US$30 million equivalent of which US$21 
million IDA) 
42. 
 This DLI supports the extension of key services, identified by MoE as priorities for quality 
education and already supported by GEQIP-E in REB schools, to refugee schools with provision by MoE, 
REBs and woreda education officials. New DLRs are introduced to establish results targets specific to 
refugee populations outside the scope of current GEQIP-E program. In the first year of the AF (2021/22), 
 
The World Bank 
 
Additional Financing to GEQIP-E for Refugees Integration (P168411) 
 
 
 
 
 
April 16, 2021 
Page 22 of 174 
 
each DLR will support the establishment of institutional arrangements and fully costed implementation 
plans for each activity; in Years 2 -4 (2022/23 – 2024/25) the DLRs then support the extension of these 
activities to a growing proportion of refugee schools.  
43. 
In order to provide incentives for service delivery at local level, and to support regional and 
woreda-level capacity, the DLI will be measured at a regional and woreda level and a share of financing 
will be used to reward REBs and woredas based on achievement of results. This will allow for a deeper 
level of understanding at the local level of the results-based modality, a lesson emerging from the 
difficulties central ministry has faced in distributing school grants for GEQIP-E.  
44. 
DLR 11.1: The Recipient has achieved the Agreed Target for provision of Basic School Grants by 
MoE and REBs to refugee primary schools (US$10 million equivalent): School Grants (SG), introduced 
under the original GEQIP-E (DLI 4), provide the primary source of non-salary income for schools. GEQIP-E 
supports the timely and complete payment of Basic School Grants, in addition to top-up Additional School 
Grants of five percent for schools in emerging regions.43 With the support of UNICEF, all refugee primary 
schools underwent capacity development in order to develop SIPs in the 2017/18 and 2018/19 school 
years. However, efforts to provide Basic School Grants to these schools have so far been unsuccessful 
owing to a lack of agreement between REBs, ARRA, and regional BoFEDs on the modality for funds flow 
to ARRA-operated schools, which are not separate legal entities and have no bank accounts.  
45. 
Supported activities: In Year 1 of the AF, 2021/22, an institutional framework will be put in place 
by MoE/REBs and ARRA to support the payment of Basic and Additional School Grants to refugee primary 
schools. Under the revised arrangements, allocations for refugee schools will be included in annual 
releases to WoFEDs for distribution to schools. The SG guidelines employed under GEQIP-E will be 
customized for refugee schools, to bolster the support provided for laboratory materials and other 
teaching and learning and students’ materials, and for orphans and unaccompanied children; children 
with special needs; and girls; and to introduce arrangements for management of school-level allocations 
by Parent-Teacher Associations (PTAs), with supervision and support from both ARRA and woredas.  
46. 
DLR: In 2021/22, the DLR rewards the preparation and approval by Government of an insitutional 
framework for the provision of Basic School Grants to refugee schools. In 2022/23, 2023/24 and 2024/25, 
the DLR rewards the delivery of Basic School Grants to an increasing share of refugee schools each year. 
For details, see Results Framework and Annex 6. 
47. 
DLR 11.2: The Recipient has achieved the Agreed Target for provision of improved in-service 
upgrading training for refugee incentive teachers  (US$10 million equivalent): GEQIP-E supports in-service 
training and continuous professional development for a range of teachers in REB schools (DLI 5). In refugee 
primary schools, the primary area of skills shortage is among refugee incentive teachers. Around 64 
percent of teachers in refugee primary schools are incentive teachers, drawn from refugee communities 
and working for a small stipend. The majority of these are not qualified teachers, resulting in a severe lack 
of appropriately skilled teachers in refugee schools. The majority of these incentive teachers are deployed 
in Grades 1-4, creating particular shortages of skills in these grades.  
 
43 GEQIP-E also supports further grants for schools which serve as cluster resource centers for students with special 
needs, and performance-based awards for schools achieving rapid improvements in retention in lower grades.