[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 54219 chars (22.6% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. MPA Program Context 
1. 
This Project Appraisal Document (PAD) describes the emergency response to the Federal Democratic Republic 
of Ethiopia under the COVID-19 Strategic Preparedness and Response Program (SPRP) using the Multiphase 
Programmatic Approach (MPA) with an overall Program financing envelope of International Development Association 
(IDA) US$1.3 billion and of International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) US$2.7 billion. 
2. 
An outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) caused by the 2019 novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) has 
been spreading rapidly across the world since December 2019, following the diagnosis of the initial cases in Wuhan, 
Hubei Province, China. Since the beginning of March 2020, the number of cases outside China has increased 
thirteenfold and the number of affected countries has tripled. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization 
(WHO) declared a global pandemic as the coronavirus rapidly spreads across the world.  Figure 1 provides details about 
the global spread of COVID-19. As of March 13, 2020, the outbreak has resulted in an estimated 145,369 cases and 
5,429 deaths in 139 countries.  
3. 
COVID-19 is one of several emerging infectious diseases (EID) outbreaks in recent decades that have emerged 
from animals in contact with humans, resulting in major outbreaks with significant public health and economic 
impacts. The last moderately severe influenza pandemics were in 1957 and 1968; each killed more than a million people 
around the world. Although countries are now far more prepared than in the past, the world is also far more 
interconnected, and many more people today have behavior risk factors such as tobacco use1 and pre-existing chronic 
health problems that make viral respiratory infections particularly dangerous2. With COVID-19, scientists are still trying 
to understand the full picture of the disease symptoms and severity. Reported symptoms in patients have varied from 
mild to severe, and can include fever, cough and shortness of breath. In general, studies of hospitalized patients have 
found that about 83 percent to 98 percent of patients develop a fever, 76 percent to 82 percent develop a dry cough 
and 11 percent to 44 percent develop fatigue or muscle aches3. Other symptoms, including headache, sore throat, 
abdominal pain, and diarrhea, have been reported, but are less common. While 3.7 percent of the people worldwide 
confirmed as having been infected have died, WHO has been careful not to describe that as a mortality rate or death 
rate.  This is because in an unfolding epidemic it can be misleading to look simply at the estimate of deaths divided by 
cases so far. Hence, given that the actual prevalence of COVID-19 infection remains unknown in most countries, it poses 
unparalleled challenges with respect to global containment and mitigation. These issues reinforce the need to 
strengthen the response to COVID-19 across all IDA/IBRD countries to minimize the global risk and impact posed by 
this disease. 
 
B. Updated MPA Program Framework 
4. 
Table-1 provides an updated overall MPA Program framework, including the proposed project for Ethiopia. 
 
                                            
1 Marquez, PV. 2020. “Does Tobacco Smoking Increases the Risk of Coronavirus Disease (Covid-19) Severity? The Case of China.”  
http://www.pvmarquez.com/Covid-19   
2 Fauci, AS, Lane, C, and Redfield, RR. 2020. “Covid-19 — Navigating the Uncharted.” New Eng J of Medicine, DOI: 10.1056/NEJMe2002387 
3 Del Rio, C. and Malani, PN. 2020. “COVID-19—New Insights on a Rapidly Changing Epidemic.” JAMA, doi:10.1001/jama.2020.3072. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia COVID-19 Emergency Response (P173750) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 36  
     
 
Table 1. MPA Program Framework 
Phase # 
Project ID 
Sequential or 
Simultaneous 
Phase’s 
Proposed DO* 
IPF, DPF 
or PforR 
Estimated 
IBRD 
Amount  
($ million) 
Estimated 
IDA 
Amount  
($ million) 
Estimated 
Other 
Amount  
($ million) 
Estimated 
Approval 
Date 
Estimated 
Environme
ntal & 
Social Risk 
Rating 
# 
P173750 
Simultaneous 
Please see 
relevant PAD 
IPF 
0.00 
82.60 
0.00 
April 2, 
2020 
High 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total 
 
 
Board Approved Financing 
Envelope 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Learning Agenda 
5. 
The project will support several activities that will contribute the overall learning agenda. These include, for 
example, assessments on behavioral and sociocultural risk factors.

A. Country Context 
6. 
Though still in its early stages, the global COVID-19 outbreak is expected to have a significant negative impact 
on Ethiopia’s economy. For example, the reduction in global air travel, including travel to Ethiopia and travel via the 
transit hub in Addis Ababa, is expected to result in a decline in Ethiopia’s forex reserves, which are already experiencing 
an acute shortage. Ethiopian Airlines continued flights to and from China, the airline cut its weekly flights from Addis 
Ababa to Beijing, Chengdu, Guanzhou and Shanghai by 33 percent in February. It has also changed its aircrafts on the 
Addis Ababa to Beijing, Guangzhou and Shanghai routes from Boeing 777 and A350 to Boeing 787-8, resulting in a 20-
45 percent change in capacity. During the West Africa Ebola outbreak in 2014, Ethiopian Airlines lost about US$8 million 
per month.  
7. 
In addition to the direct impact of COVID-19, the anticipated slowdown in the global economy will likely 
reduce trade and disrupt global manufacturing supply chains that involve Ethiopia. The effects of a pandemic-driven 
global economic downturn are impossible to predict. However, China and other highly affected countries are 
experiencing dramatic reductions in economic activity, with a high risk of damage to financial markets.  
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
8. 
Ethiopia has a comparative advantage by having the oldest and most established National Public Health 
Institute (NPHI) in Africa. In addition, the country is strategically located. The proposed Ethiopia Covid-19 Emergency 
Response Project will leverage this advantage through a number of activities under the Africa Centres for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) Project (P167916) that will be implemented in Ethiopia but will have regional reach and 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia COVID-19 Emergency Response (P173750) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 36  
     
 
impact, including: (a) establishment of a regional reference laboratory and a centralized event-based surveillance (EBS) 
network for priority pathogens across the continent; (b) piloting and rolling out the Anti-Microbial Resistance (AMR) 
scorecard for tracking AMR progress; and (c) implementing a system to collate national surveillance data and ensure 
that selected countries are trained and connected into the data collation and analysis platform. Moreover, Ethiopia’s 
proximity to multiple fragile states and as a major land and air transportation hub greatly exacerbate the vulnerabilities 
to epidemics, whilst limited disease-detection functions in Ethiopia expose the African continent and beyond to the 
potential undetected spread of diseases. In addition, Ethiopia currently shelters about 1.5 million registered refugees 
from neighboring fragile states, the second largest refugee population in Africa. The majority of refugees are located 
in emerging and under-developed subnational states with limited health services and opportunities depending largely 
on humanitarian assistance. All of Ethiopia’s neighboring fragile states are highly susceptible to outbreaks at 
subnational levels. Strengthening core pandemic preparedness and response capacities in Ethiopia will help protect 
neighboring countries with already weak systems and capacity especially as a significant level of the proposed project 
investment will occur adjacent to the borders with these fragile states.  
9. 
Current statistics on COVID-19 and Ethiopia. Ethiopia has five flights per day to China that brings a high risk of 
importation and exportation of COVID-19. There are no confirmed cases, however, suspected cases have been detected 
through surveillance activities that involve screening and health workers reporting cases that meet the standard case 
definition. Of the 24 suspected cases, 23 have been negative and one is currently in an isolation unit pending lab results. 
So far, 77 alerts have been investigated and no case in isolation is found. For travelers, 412,738 passengers have been 
screened.  
10. 
COVID-19 response coordination structures. The Government has strengthened its preparedness efforts and 
has set up a national preparedness and response coordination mechanism through an Emergency Operation Center 
(EOC). The Government has also set up four levels of coordination: (a) National Disaster Risk Management (NDRM) 
Council (highest level) led by the deputy prime minister’s office; (b) Public Health Emergency Management (PHEM) 
Task Force (multi-sectoral) led by the Minister of Health; (c) PHEM Technical Task Force led by the Director General of 
Ethiopian Public Health Institute (EPHI); and (d) PHEM Technical Working Group led by the national incident manager. 
11. 
Ethiopia is at very high risk due to travel and trade with most of COVID-19 affected countries. Initially Ethiopia 
prepared an Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan (EPRP) with the assumption of the importation of COVID-19 
cases from China. The outbreak is affecting about 123 countries globally. Currently, ten countries in Africa are affected 
by the outbreak and thus the preparedness plan was revised based on the very high-risk level of Ethiopia and assuming 
community transmission. Thus, for Ethiopia to be able to prevent and respond to the outbreak it needs additional 
budget to strengthen the preparedness activities and put in place a capacity to respond to the outbreak when cases 
are confirmed at the national and subnational levels.     
12. 
A Simulation Exercise (SIMEX) was conducted in Ethiopia on February 11, 2020 to test capacities, systems and 
mechanisms to respond to public health emergencies. The findings are an important source of information on gaps 
and weaknesses that currently exist and help prioritize where to support the country’s response efforts: 
a. Reporting: Communication mechanisms between health authorities, EOC management and partners such 
as WHO and the Africa CDC secretariat need to be strengthening at the national and regional levels; 
b. Workforce development: While national level staff is familiar with existing Standard Operating Procedures 
(SOP), International Health Regulations (IHR) 2005 and its requirements, regional EOC staff need to be 
sensitized with the IHR guidelines and their requirement to ensure full-scale implementation. 
c. Preparedness: The PHEM guidelines EPRP need to be customized using local context at the regional level; 
EPRPs are in place for regions where Vulnerability, Risk Assessment and Mapping has been conducted, 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia COVID-19 Emergency Response (P173750) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 36  
     
 
however, there is a need for identification and equipping of isolation facilities and healthcare facilities which 
can be utilized at times of outbreaks. 
d. Emergency response operations: Procedures for correct use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) during 
emergency response at the subnational level need to be strengthened; SOPs describing clear lines of 
reporting are in place; flow of operational information between national and subnational levels needs to be 
strengthened; regional EOCs were unable to change the emergency response scale to handle the evolving 
scenario; infection prevention and control measures at regional EOCs need to be disseminated through 
easy/readable SOPs for PPE donning and doffing; COVID-19 specific drills and trainings through simulations 
need to take place at the regional level; resources/expertise/support are needed from the national level to 
impart trainings at the regional level. 
e. Risk Communication: The adoption of risk communication guidelines needs to take place at the regional 
level; national and regional EOCs are well aware of procedures and mechanisms to follow while engaging 
the public during an emergency. 
13. 
Ethiopia’s EPRP: The overall objectives of the strategic Preparedness and Response Plan for COVID-19 being 
prepared by countries around the world aim to: (a) slow and stop transmission, prevent outbreaks and delay spread; 
(b) provide optimized care for all patients, especially the seriously ill; and (c) minimize the impact of the epidemic on 
health systems, social services and economic activity. The EPRP, prepared by the Government of Ethiopia (GoE), has 
the objective to “strengthen the surveillance system and response capacity to early detect and respond to the possible 
importation of the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak in Ethiopia.” The GoE’s financing request and list of activities and 
investments to be supported by EPRP include primarily: (a) establish responsible coordination mechanisms (establish 
working groups); (b) prepare the action plan to implement the surveillance, outbreak investigation, case management 
and prevention and control of the diseases; (c) prepare guidelines, leaflets, health education materials, etc.; (d) 
advocate and sensitize the public and travelers; (e) establish new temporary isolation rooms in selected hospitals; (f) 
enhance sample collection and reference system; (g) provide training for health workers on COVID-19; (h) provide 
orientation to airline crew members; (i) ensure drugs and medical supplies for case management and infection 
prevention; and (j) stockpile laboratory equipment, reagents and consumable supplies.  
14. 
Links between economic effects of COVID-19 and the health sector in Ethiopia: As mentioned above, an 
expected decrease in the availability of forex in the country may impact the country’s ability to purchase essential 
medical commodities and drugs (insulin, antibiotics, etc.) on the global market. While the proposed project will 
specifically address the emergency response to COVID-19, it should be noted that existing World Bank operations and 
financing mechanisms in the health sector will be used to strategically address gaps in forex that may arise for the 
purchase of these essential commodities. For example, the program boundary of the Health Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDG) Program for Results (P123531) is the Sustainable Development Goals Performance Fund (SDG-PF), which 
is a pooled financing mechanism managed by the Ministry of Health (MoH) with contributions from 11 donors4. The 
focus of the SDG-PF is improvement of delivery of maternal and child health services through primary health care units 
and strengthening sector capacity, including human resources, financial management (FM) and supply chain 
management, health management information systems and health technologies. The primary use of forex mobilized 
through the SDG-PF is to procure medicines and commodities and will continue to be an important mechanism to 
leverage with the expected downturns in the economy and availability of forex and could be used to address new 
financing needs generated from the crisis.  
                                            
4 United Kingdom Department for International Development (DFID), United Nations Children’s’ Fund (UNICEF), European Union (EU), 
GAVI - The Vaccine Alliance, Netherlands Government, Spanish Development Cooperation, United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), 
Irish Aid, WHO, Italian Cooperation and the World Bank. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia COVID-19 Emergency Response (P173750) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 36  
     
 
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives  
15. 
The proposed project is aligned with the WBG Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Ethiopia.5 Improving 
the quality, equity, and utilization of health services is Focus Area 2.2 of the Ethiopia CPF. The proposed project fills 
critical gaps in the World Bank’s support to the Ethiopian health sector, as the current portfolio does not explicitly 
include disease surveillance and response to global pandemics such as COVID-19, apart for the foundational elements 
that will be established through the World Bank-financed Africa CDC Regional Project (P167916). The proposed project 
is also fully aligned with Government health sector strategies, such as the Health Sector Transformation Plan (HSTP) 
that identifies building capacity for disease surveillance and responses to public health emergencies as key priorities. 
While this project was not included in the CPF for Ethiopia, the emergency has increased the priority of health 
protection and treatment in Ethiopia and remains aligned with the CPF’s Objective 2.2.

A. Development Objectives 
 
The Project objectives are aligned to the results chain of the COVID-19 Strategic Preparedness and Response 
Program (SPRP).  
 
Project DO statement: The objective of the project is to prevent, detect and respond to the threat posed by 
COVID-19 and strengthen national systems for public health preparedness in Ethiopia. 
 
16. 
The proposed project intends to fill critical gaps in implementing the EPRP, strengthen the prevention 
activities, rapid detection, preparedness and response to COVID-19 outbreak. The project’s objectives and design are 
in line with the request from the Ministry of Finance (MoF) for US$122 million provided on March 6, 2020. Given the 
allocation for Ethiopia from the COVID-19 Fast Track Facility is only US$82.6 million, the activities financed through the 
project will remain aligned to the national plan but support critical activities up to the allocated amount for the project. 
The budget for the project intents to be utilized within 15 months to support prioritized interventions to enhance 
preparedness activities for COVID-19 and strengthen the health system both at national and subnational level. Within 
Ethiopia’s EPRP, three scenarios to address variations in the evolution of the outbreak have been prepared, with the 
“worst-case scenario” budget amounting to approximately US$500 million. It is important to note that despite the IDA 
envelope mobilized through the project, critical gaps in financing for preparedness and response will remain, for which 
additional support from other sources will be needed. The World Bank will continue to engage and coordinate with 
partners both at the country and global level in an effort to identify opportunities to fill these gaps.  
17. 
The specific objectives of the project, aligned with Ethiopia’s EPRP, are to: (a) strengthen coordination of 
preparedness and response operations at national and subnational levels; (b) reinforce screening procedures at the 
points of entry; (c) strengthen surveillance capacity for early detection of cases, alert/rumor management and follow 
up of contacts; (d) strengthen laboratory capacity for the diagnosis of COVID-19; (e) increase the capacity to rapidly 
isolate and provide optimized care for persons suspected or confirmed to have COVID-19; (f) implement optimal 
infection and control measures in healthcare settings and communities; (g) increase awareness and informed decision-
making among communities through risk communication and community engagement; and (h) provide and pre-
position medical supplies and commodities, and other logistics for COVID-19 management.  
                                            
5 Report Number: 119576. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia COVID-19 Emergency Response (P173750) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 36  
     
 
 
PDO level indicators:  
 
18. 
The proposed PDO level indicators are the following:  
a. Early detection and timely reporting of outbreaks  
• 
Achieving the required timeliness of reporting for COVID-19 and other immediately reportable diseases 
under Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response (IDSR). (Percentage)  
• 
For the first 10 suspect cases in the country, percentage of lab results available within 72 hours. 
(Percentage) 
b. Rapid response to infectious disease outbreaks 
• 
Responding within 24 hours to confirmed outbreaks of COVID-19 and other immediately reportable 
diseases. (Percentage) 
• 
Percentage of district health centers/district hospitals with pandemic preparedness and response plans 
per MoH Guidelines. (Percentage) 
• 
Percentage of health facilities with trained staff in infection prevention control per MoH approved 
protocols. (Percentage) 
 
B. Project Components 
 
19. 
The proposed project will be a standalone operation for Ethiopia to address critical country-level needs for 
preparedness and response for COVID-19: While the GoE is one of the three recipients of the ACDCP (alongside African 
Union (AU) and the Government of Zambia), the proposed project will be processed as a standalone operation that 
builds upon the ACDCP. The proposed project will fill critical financing gaps that have been identified due to the new 
emergency preparedness and response needs created by COVID-19. Project design will include similar implementation 
arrangements and fiduciary systems as the ACDCP, as described below. 
20. 
The project will comprise of the following components:  
21. 
Component 1. Medical Supplies and Equipment [US$43.97 million equivalent]: This component will finance the 
procurement of medical supplies and equipment needed for activities outlined in the EPRP such as (i) case 
management; (ii) infection prevention and control; and (iii) other pillars of the strategic plan. Specifically, items 
procured will include: (i) drugs and medical supplies for case management and infection prevention, including 
production of hand sanitizer; and (ii) equipment, reagents, testing kits, and consumable supplies for laboratories. This 
component will also allow for flexibility to allocate resources for the purchasing of essential pharmaceutical (insulin, 
antibiotics, etc.) and medical supplies as the availability of forex in the country becomes reduced due to the economic 
impact of the pandemic and the existing mechanisms are insufficient to address the critical health system needs (such 
as the SDG-PF described above).  
22. 
Component 2. Preparedness, Capacity Building and Training [US$22.20 million]: This component will finance 
activities related to preparedness, capacity building and training, guided by the different pillars and activities of the 
EPRP. These include: (i) coordination at the national, subnational and regional/cross-country levels; (ii) EOC 
functionalization (including sub-national coordination and support for preparedness (EOC functionalization, training, 
supervision); (iii) deployment of health workers and other personnel required for COVID-19 preparedness and 
response, human resources for supportive supervision and subnational support; (iv) financing of operating costs, such 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia COVID-19 Emergency Response (P173750) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 36  
     
 
as vehicle rental, fuel and other administrative-related costs for supportive supervision and monitoring; (v) support for 
screening people entering in to the country at designated points of entry (airports, border crossings, etc.); (vi) 
strengthening call/hotline centers; (vii) strengthening PHEM and community- and EBS for COVID-19; and (viii) building 
diagnostic capacity for COVID-19 at the subnational (regional/state) level. 
23. 
Component 3. Community Discussions and Information Outreach [US$8.50 million]: Activities supported by 
this component include: (i) risk communication and community engagement; (ii) behavioral and sociocultural risk 
factors assessments; (iii) production of Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE) strategy and training 
documents; (iv) production of communication materials; (v) establish a production center for information and 
communication tools production center (media and community engagement); and (vi) monitoring and evidence 
generation; and (vii) human resources for risk communication. 
24. 
Component 4. Quarantine, Isolation and Treatment Centers [US$6.93 million]: Activities supported by this 
component include: Establishment (through the rehabilitation of existing facilities or setting up of temporary 
structures) and equipping of quarantine, isolation and treatment centers, including the provision of nutrition and 
dignity kits.   
25. 
Component 5. Project Implementation and Monitoring [US$1.00 million]: Implementing the proposed project 
will require administrative and human resources that exceed the current capacity of the implementing institutions, in 
addition to those mobilized through the ACDCP. Activities include: (i) support for procurement, FM, environmental and 
social safeguards, monitoring and evaluation, and reporting; (ii) recruitment and Training of Grants Management Unit 
and EPHI staff and technical consultants; and (iii) operating costs.  
26. 
The primary activities in the EPRP to be supported by the project, in line with the GoE’s request, are presented 
in Table 16: 
 
Table 1: Ethiopia EPRP Budget Breakdown by Planned Pillars 
 
No. 
Pillar 
Activity 
Budget 
(US$) 
1 
Coordination, 
regional support 
and EOC 
functionalization 
Sub national coordination and support of preparedness  
7,624,205 
• 
EOC functionalization (including rehabilitation) 
• 
Trainings 
• 
Supervision 
• 
Quarantine centers establishment  
• 
Human resources for supportive supervision and subnational 
support  
1,033,452 
Vehicle rental, fuel and other administrative related costs for supportive 
supervision and monitoring 
551,175 
Capacity building and experience sharing 
482,278 
Sub total 
9,691,110 
 2 
 Surveillance 
and 
investigation 
Strengthening PHEM and community and event-based surveillance for 
COVID-19  
6,749,439 
Build regional diagnostic capacity for COVID-19  
1,260,387 
                                            
6 The specific budgets for each activity are indicative at the time of appraisal and can be adjusted during implementation, following 
project implementation guidelines and procedures, to allow for agility and flexibility in responding to evolving country needs in COVID-
19 preparedness and response efforts. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia COVID-19 Emergency Response (P173750) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 36  
     
 
Sub total 
10,581,825 
 3 
Point of Entry 
(PoE) 
Capacity building (training, manpower requirement at 26 ports of 
entries)  
3,162,364 
Establishing nine screening post/room at designated land crossing POEs 
413,381 
Sub total 
3,575,745 
4 
Case 
management 
and Infection 
Prevention and 
Control (IPC) 
Procurement of medical equipment, drugs and supplies 
        
37,903,721  
Establish 15 the isolation and treatment centers and furnish  
13,346,528 
Sub total 
51,250,249 
5 
Risk 
communication 
and Community    
engagement 
Behavioral and sociocultural risk factors assessment 
3,396,198 
Production of RCCE strategy and training documents 
Production of communication materials 
Establish communication tool and media production center 
• 
Media and community engagement 
3,403,146 
• 
Monitoring and evidence generation 
• 
Documentation 
• 
Impact assessment 
Human resources for risk communication 
701,727 
  
Sub total 
7,501,071 
Grand total 
  
82,600,000 
 
 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
 
27. 
The proposed project was selected for COVID-19 financing because of the strategic place Ethiopia holds when 
it comes to global connectivity and travel, and the risks for the country generated by this fact. The proposed financing 
for the Project will be provided through the World Bank Group’s COVID-19 Fast Track Facility, as part of a Global COVID-
19 Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) Program designed to assist countries to prevent, detect and respond to 
the threat posed by COVID-19 and strengthen national systems for public health preparedness. The amount allocated 
to Ethiopia under the Fast Track Facility is based on criteria for each country taking in to consideration key factors such 
as population size, Gross Domestic Product per capita, and other selected criteria.  Bole International Airport in Addis 
Ababa is the hub for Ethiopian Airlines, as well as several other airlines, who together place Ethiopia as the most 
important hub for connections between countries in Africa and the rest of the world. In addition, travelers from 
affected countries or who have contact history could indirectly come to Ethiopia through different airlines after 
interconnected flights. Based on the WHO AFRO comprehensive COVID-19 risk mapping and prioritization, Ethiopia has 
been identified as one of the top priority 13 countries for preparedness measures due to their direct links or high 
volume of travel to China.  The first two countries that confirmed COVID-19 in the WHO Africa Region came from 
Priority 1 countries.  The scope and the components of this project are fully aligned with the WBG COVID-19 Fast Track 
Facility, using standard components as described in the COVID-19 MPA Board paper. The proposed project 
complements the longer-term development work in the health sector, including the Health SDG Program for Results 
(P123531) which seeks to improve maternal and child health and nutrition outcomes, as well as the Africa CDC Regional 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia COVID-19 Emergency Response (P173750) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 36  
     
 
Investment Project (ACDCP, P167916), which seeks to strengthen continental and regional infectious disease detection 
and response systems, including national systems such as in Ethiopia. This project has triggered paragraph 12 of the 
World Bank Policy Investment Project Financing (IPF). 
28. 
Phased responses through the COVID-19 Fast Track Facility.  While support will surely be needed to respond 
to the economic impact of COVID-19 on households, businesses and government budgets, the World Bank’s approach 
is to lead with the health response. As a first step, the majority of operations processed through the Fast Track Facility 
will be health sector operations to respond to urgent preparedness and response needs related to the COVID-19 
outbreak. One of the challenges with the response to COVID-19 is the availability (and price) of medical equipment and 
supplies. The global Pandemic Supply Chain Network (PSCN), of which the World Bank is a co-convener, has identified 
a list of medical products critical to the response. The task team will work with GoE counterparts to customize this list 
further to develop a positive list of goods to be procured with World Bank financing. Indeed, there is growing disruption 
to economic activities, businesses and livelihoods. Options for support through other financing instruments are being 
explored as the facility is established and through country consultations. The Project objectives are aligned to the 
results chain of the COVID-19 Response Program.

A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements  
29. 
The Ministry of Health will be the implementing agency for the project. The State Minister for Programs will 
be responsible for leading the execution of project activities. The GMU of the MoH’s Partnership and Cooperation 
Directorate (PCD) will be responsible for the day-to-day management of activities supported under the project, as well 
as the preparation of a consolidated annual workplan and a consolidated activity and financial report for the above-
mentioned project components. The PCD already manages and coordinates several donor-funded projects in the health 
sector, including the Health SDG Program for Results (P123531) and the Ethiopia part of the ACDCP. In addition, 
technical directorates at the MoH, the regional health bureaus, and other key agencies will be involved in project 
activities based on their functional capacities and institutional mandates. The key staff hired or assigned to the MoH 
PCD GMU for the ACDCP will be the same for this project. These include: Project Coordinator, Finance Officer, 
Environmental and Social Safeguards Officer, and a Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist. The MoH PCD GMU will 
recruit as needed (upon receiving non-objection from the World Bank) additional staff (fiduciary, technical, etc.) to 
EPHI and MoH PCD GMU to supplement staff hired or assigned for the ACDCP. The MoH PCDGMU may also recruit 
specialized technical staff as needed, and some activities may be outsourced to third parties through contract 
agreements acceptable to the World Bank. 
30. 
The EPHI will serve as the key technical entity for this project. It will both support the PCD and directly 
implement certain technical activities, including procurement of medical supplies, commodities and equipment for 
activities outlined in the EPRP. The EPHI will report directly to the Minister, and it will share the project’s technical and 
financial updates with the MoH PCD GMU. The abovementioned staff hired or assigned at EPHI will also be used for 
this project and will work closely with existing coordinating bodies and focal points within government mobilized for 
the national COVID-19 response. The MoH will also ensure that these key focal points are effectively mobilized and 
engaged to ensure proper implementation of the environmental and social framework elements of the project. 
31. 
Safeguards arrangements: With regards to environmental and social safeguards policies, while the project will 
apply the new Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), the existing safeguards documents prepared for the ACDCP 
will be used as a basis to inform the development of the ESF policies and documentation for the new operation. The 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia COVID-19 Emergency Response (P173750) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 36  
     
 
safeguards instruments which were prepared for the ACDCP will be updated to cover, among other things, the relevant 
part of COVID-19 Quarantine Guidelines and appropriate WHO COVID-19 biosafety guidelines so that all relevant risks 
and mitigation measures will be covered. 
 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
32. 
The EPHI will be responsible f

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

mitments to the effective implementation and continued funding of the activities, helping ensure its 
sustainability.

A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis  
34. 
The COVID-19 outbreak clouds an already fragile global economic outlook and can further set back gains in 
poverty alleviation, in addition to the population health impacts already observed in the countries impacted by the 
outbreak. Potential tightening of credit conditions, weaker growth, and the allocation of public resources to fight the 
outbreak are likely to reduce governments’ ability to invest in other sectors. Low-income countries are expected to feel 
the impact, as current estimates suggest that a one percent decline in developing country growth rates traps an 
additional 20 million people into poverty. 
35. 
The pandemic weighs on economic activity through both demand and supply channels. On the demand side, 
activities involving interactions between people are reduced in efforts to prevent transmission of the virus. On the 
supply side, prevention measures, such as factory closures, have significantly disrupted production of tradable and 
non-tradable goods around the world. Available high-frequency data point to a major contraction in economic activity 
in China this quarter. These include sharp downturns in daily coal consumption for power generation, average road 
congestion, nationwide passenger traffic, tourism activity, and container throughput at Chinese ports. A month after 
Chinese New Year (January 25, 2020), travel within China had reduced by 80 percent compared to before the start of 
the outbreak. Most international carriers have cancelled their flights to China until at least the end-April 2020, and 
maybe longer. In January-February 2020, container shipping companies stopped movement of vessels at a record pace. 
At end-February 2020, coal use in major power generation plants had decreased by 50 percent compared to the same 
period in 2019; pollution, an indicator of industrial production, was down 40 percent compared to normal. As of mid-
February 2020, Morgan Stanley Financial has estimated industrial production at 30-50 percent of trends from before 
the outbreak. Moreover, production indicators for electronics have faltered, suggesting growing disruptions to China’s 
globally-integrated manufacturing sector. In this context, the manufacturing PMI suffered its worst performance. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia COVID-19 Emergency Response (P173750) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 36  
     
 
B. Fiduciary 
36. 
Project implementation will benefit from the existing FM arrangements within the MoH and EPHI. Project 
activities will be coordinated by the MoH’s PCD, and the GMU which is accountable to the PCD will handle the day to 
day management of this project.  EPHI, regional health bureaus, and other key agencies will be involved in project 
activities. 
37. 
Recent FM assessments at the finance units of MoH, EPHI, and two Regional Health Bureaus (RHBs) have been 
conducted by the World Bank for the Ethiopia part of the ACDCP. Based on those assessments, key risks identified 
include: i) multiple implementing entities at the federal and regional levels, some with capacity gaps, and high rates of 
staff turnover, which also leads to complexities in the operation of FM arrangements, with subsequent risk of delays in 
implementation, reporting, and disbursements; ii) the transfer of funds to sub-implementers, some of which have weak 
internal controls and potential involvement of others not previously assessed by the World Bank; iii) use of parallel 
systems in MoH (GMU and Grant Finance Case Team) for preparing financial reports, which may affect their quality 
and timeliness; iv) weaknesses in internal audit functions, including lack of familiarity with World Bank requirements; 
and v) internal control weaknesses related to fixed-asset and inventory management at the EPHI. Given the above risk 
factors, the nature of activities involved in this specific emergency operation, and the context in which they might be 
implemented, the FM risk is considered High. 
38. 
Mitigating measures agreed under the ACDCP are fully applicable to this operation. Those measures include: 
a) a clear definition of staffing needs in different entities to strengthen their capacity; b) the establishment of 
coordination mechanisms among different entities, including deadlines and requirements for budget preparation, 
transfers of funds, and reporting; c) reforms to strengthen fixed-asset and inventory management at EPHI; d) the use 
of separate bank accounts, accounting records, and reporting requirements for EPHI and RHBs; and e) revision of roles 
and responsibilities within the MoH (grant finance and GMU) regarding the preparation and submission of interim 
financial reports (IFRs). Some progress is reported on the mitigation measures in that EPHI has indicated actions are 
already being taken to address the gaps on fixed asset and inventory management whereas MoH has indicated that it 
has discussed and agreed internally to resolve the duplication of efforts at Grant Finance Case Team and GMU. 
39. 
As the lead implementing entity, the MoH will be responsible for preparing and consolidating the budget of 
the project in consultation with EPHI and RHBs. The government’s budget procedures will be followed. The 
implementing entities will apply modified cash basis of accounting and follow the government’s accounting manual. 
Peachtree accounting will be used to record the transactions of the project. Finance officers recruited/assigned for the 
Ethiopia part of the ACDCP will also handle the accounting and financial reporting at the implementing entities. As per 
the ACDCP implementation arrangements, until the abovementioned key project staff are recruited, government staff 
with appropriate expertise for each position’s terms of reference will be assigned to the position as an interim 
arrangement. Based on assessment of workload, hiring of additional finance staff will be considered. Internal control 
system of the Government is strong although some gaps are noted. Internal audit coverage is low with capacity gaps 
and staffing constraints. The MoH will prepare quarterly consolidated IFRs collecting the quarterly IFRs of EPHI, and the 
RHBs. The IFRs will be submitted within 45 days of the end of the reporting period. MoH will open a separate US dollar 
designated account and local currency account with financial institutions acceptable to the World Bank. The other 
implementing entities will also open separate local currency accounts. All disbursement methods will be allowed, and 
disbursements to the designated account will be based on expenditure forecasts as per the instructions laid out in the 
disbursement letter. If Advances are to be made to UN Agencies through direct contracting, necessary periodic reports 
should be submitted by the UN Agency showing utilization of the advance and additional advance request, if any. 
External audits should be conducted by the Office of the Federal Auditor General (OFAG) or by an auditor nominated 
by OFAG which is acceptable to the World Bank. The audit report should be submitted within six months of the end of 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia COVID-19 Emergency Response (P173750) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 36  
     
 
the period end. Subject to the successful completion of the actions recommended to address the risks identified, the 
proposed FM arrangements can be considered acceptable to the World Bank. 
40. 
To facilitate for the timely release of resources and commence the implementation, the project will open the 
designated accounts and take any other necessary action to start implementation without delay. IFR formats and 
updated audit TORs will be agreed at the implementation stage. Furthermore, the World Bank will continue to provide 
its implementation support and supervision missions and update the risk and mitigating measures regularly.  
41. 
Retroactive financing. Withdrawals up to an aggregate amount not to exceed SDR 12,120,000 under the credit 
and SDR 12,120,000 under the grant may be made for payments made prior to this date but on or after December 15, 
2019, for eligible expenditures. 
 
(ii)   Procurement  
 
42. 
Procurement for the project will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s Procurement Regulations 
for IPF Borrowers for Goods, Works, Non-Consulting and Consulting Services, dated July 1, 2016 (revised in 
November 2017 and August 2018). The project will be subject to the World Bank’s Anticorruption Guidelines, dated 
October 15, 2006, revised in January 2011, and as of July 1, 2016. The project will use the Systematic tracking of 
Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) to plan, record and track procurement transactions. 
43. 
The major planned procurement includes medical supplies, drugs, and equipment, capacity building and 
training, community outreach, establishing quarantine centers and call centers, and support to the project 
implementation and monitoring. Finalization of the streamlined project procurement strategy for development (PPSD) 
has been deferred to implementation. An initial procurement plan for the first three months has been agreed with the 
Borrower and will be updated during implementation. 
44. 
The proposed procurement approach prioritizes fast track emergency procurement for the required goods, 
works and services. While procurement methods that include National Approach, Open International Approach, 
Request for Quotations (RFQ) and Direct Contracting can be used, key measures to fast track procurement include the 
use of methods that will ensure expedited delivery. These include direct contracting of UN Agencies, direct contracting 
of firms as appropriate, RFQ with no threshold limit for this method as appropriate. The National Approach can be used 
for up to US$2 million in goods and US$35 million in works. 
45. 
Bid Securing Declaration may be used instead of the bid security. Performance Security may not be required 
for small contracts. Advance payment may be increased to 40 percent while secured with the advance payment 
guarantee. The time for submission of bids/proposal can be shortened to 15 days in competitive national and 
international procedures, and to three-five days for the RFQ depending on the value and complexity of the requested 
scope of bid. 
46. 
Procurement implementation will be undertaken by two agencies:  Ethiopia MoH and EPHI. Two key 
directorates will play a procurement role in the Ethiopia MoH, namely; (i) Ethiopia MoH’s Finance, Procurement and 
Property Administration that is responsible for procurement processes, and (ii) Public Health Infrastructure Directorate 
that provides technical input and support for all works procurements and manages contract implementation of works 
contracts.  
47. 
If the MoH or EPHI requests, the World Bank may consider supporting the MoH/EPHI in the procurement of 
the initial needs of the medical equipment and supplies through HEIS (Hands on Expanded Support).  Streamlined 
procedures for approval of emergency procurement to expedite decision making and approvals by the Recipient have 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia COVID-19 Emergency Response (P173750) 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 36  
     
 
been agreed. 
48. 
The major risks to procurement are: (a) slow procurement processing and decision making with potential 
implementation delays; and (b) poor contract management system with potential time and cost overrun and poor-
quality deliverable; and (c) lack of familiarity in dealing with such a novel epidemic. To mitigate these risks the following 
actions are recommended: (a) maintaining accountability for following the expedited approval processes for 
emergency; and (b) assigning staff with responsibility of managing each contract. To strengthen their procurement 
capacity MoH and EPHI will consider hiring a Procurement Agent with capabilities of work and assuring continuity of 
services in the situation of the restricted movement. To prevent delays and disruption in payments, disbursement of 
World Bank financing shall be made through the Direct Payment disbursement method, unless a Special Commitment 
disbursement method has been selected. 
49. 
These risks are elevated by the global nature of the COVID-19 outbreak, which creates shortages of supplies 
and necessary services. This may result in increased prices and cost. The Team will monitor and support 
implementation to agree with MoH and EPHI on reasonableness of the procurement approaches and obtained 
outcomes considering the available market response and needs. 
50. 
Various industries are feeling the impact of COVID-19, especially the construction industry that subsequently 
impacts the procurement process and implementation of the contracts. To deal with potential procurement delays 
because of the spreading of COVID-19, the World Bank will support MoH and EPHI in applying any procedural 
flexibilities (e.g. bids submitted by an authorized third party, exertion bid submission dates, advising the Recipient on 
the applicability of force majeure, etc.).   
51. 
The procurement risk is High. 
52. 
The World Bank’s oversight of procurement will be done through increased implementation support, and 
increased procurement post review based on a 20 percent sample while the World Bank’s prior review will not apply. 
 
C. Legal Operational Policies 
 
. 
. . 
 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
No 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 
No 
. 
 
D. Environmental and Social Standards 
53. 
The Project will have positive impacts as it should improve COVID-19 surveillance, monitoring and containment. 
However, the project could also cause high environment, health and safety risks due to the dangerous nature of the 
pathogen (COVID-19) and reagents to be used in the project-supported laboratories. Laboratory-associated infections due 
to inadequate adherence to occupational health and safety standards can lead to illness and death among laboratory 
workers. The laboratories which will use COVID-19 diagnostic testing can generate biological waste, chemical waste, and 
other hazardous biproducts. As the laboratories to be supported by the project will process COVID-19 that can have the 
potential to cause serious illness or potentially lethal harm to the laboratory staff and to the community, effective 
administrative and containment controls should be put in place so minimize these risks. Environmentally and socially 
sound laboratory operation will require adequate provisions for minimization of occupational health and safety risks, 
proper management and disposal of hazardous waste (including sharps disposal), use of approved disinfectants, proper 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia COVID-19 Emergency Response (P173750) 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 36  
     
 
quarantine procedure for COVID-19, appropriate chemical and infectious substance handling and transportation 
procedure, institutional/implementation arrangement for environmental and social risks, etc. To achieve this, the Ethiopia 
MoH/Ethiopia Public Health Institute will update the existing Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
prepared for the Africa CDC Project/ bio-safety level (BSL)2 Labs at the implementation stage so that the laboratories to 
be supported by the project will apply international best practices in COVID-19 diagnostic testing and other COVID-19 
response activities. Until the update has been cleared, the project will apply the existing ESMF in conjunction with WHO 
standards on COVID-19 response. International best practice is outlined in the WHO “Operational Planning Guidelines to 
Support Country Preparedness and Response”, annexed to the WHO “COVID-19 Strategic Preparedness and Response 
Plan” (February 12, 2020). Further guidance is included in the WHO “Key considerations for repatriation and quarantine 
of travelers in relation to the outbreak of novel coronavirus 2019-nCoV” (February 11, 2020).  
54. 
These guidelines include provisions to address the needs of patients, particularly the most vulnerable – the 
elderly and those with compromised immune systems due to pre-existing conditions. They also include provisions on 
the establishment of quarantine centers and their operation considering the dignity and needs of patients, and the 
maintenance of appropriate hygiene and safety procedures to minimize spread of infection. Each beneficiary medical 
facility/lab will apply infection control and waste management plan following the requirements of the ESMF. 
55. 
The ESMF will adequately cover the procedures for the safe handling, storage, and processing of COVID-19 
materials including the techniques for preventing, minimizing, and controlling environmental and social impacts during 
the operation of project supported laboratories. It will also clearly outline the implementation arrangement to be put in 
place by Ethiopia MoH/Ethiopia Public Health Institute for environmental and social risk management; training programs 
focused on COVID-19 laboratory biosafety, operation of isolation centers and screening posts, as well as compliance 
monitoring and reporting requirements. The relevant part of COVID-19 Quarantine Guideline and WHO COVID-19 
biosafety guidelines will be taken reviewed while preparing the ESMF so that all relevant risks and mitigation measures 
will be covered. In addition to the ESMF, the client will implement the activities suggested in the Environmental and Social 
Commitment Plan (ESCP), which has been prepared and disclosed on March 16, 2020. It will also implement the 
Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP) for the project in the proposed timeline. SEP for the proposed project has been 
prepared and disclosed March 16, 2020. 
56. 
The SEP outlines a structured approach to engagement with stakeholders that is based upon meaningful 
consultation and disclosure of appropriate information, considering the specific challenges associated with COVID-19. 
In cases of the most vulnerable – the elderly and those with compromised immune systems due to pre-existing conditions- 
stakeholder engagement should minimize close contact and follow the recommended hygiene procedures as outlined in 
the CDC Interim Infection Prevention and Control Recommendations for patients with confirmed COVID-19 or persons 
under investigation for COVID-19 in Healthcare Settings. People affected by project activities, including construction 
workers on laboratory and clinic sites, should be provided with accessible and inclusive means to raise concerns and 
grievances. To ensure this approach, the project has included a component on RCCE, encompassing behavioral and 
sociocultural risk factors assessment, production of RCCE strategy and training documents, production of communication 
materials, media and community engagement, and documentation in line with WHO “Pillar 2: Risk communication and 
community engagement”. The approaches taken will thereby ensure that information is meaningful, timely, and accessible 
to all affected stakeholders, including usage of different languages, addressing cultural sensitivities, as well as challenges 
deriving from illiteracy or disabilities. Due to the expected country-wide implementation of activities, the differences of 
areas and socioeconomic groups will equally be taken into consideration during rollout of the RCCE. 
57. 
The key risk related to the operation are public and occupational health risks deriving from engagement with 
people and samples contaminated with COVID19. Accordingly, provisions need thus to be in place for proper safety 
systems, with a focus on quarantine centers, screening posts, and laboratories to be funded by the project; encompassing 
above all OHS and waste management procedures. WBG EHS Guidelines, such as those related to Community Health and