[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 54665 chars (22.0% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
 
1. 
Stimulating entrepreneurship can contribute substantially to non-farm income 
generation and employment in Ethiopia. Official government figures indicate that the 
Ethiopian real GDP per capita has grown by 6.5 percent on average per year since 2001/02. 
However, even though the private sector has expanded rapidly in Ethiopia for the last decade, it 
has done so from a low starting point. According to the latest figures on employment the formal 
private sector is still very small; paid work in this sector accounted for less than 5 percent of total 
employment. Most people are dependent on subsistence agriculture, and around 80 percent of the 
workforce makes a living in agriculture. The hard and vulnerable life in agriculture, coupled with 
few jobs in the formal sector, the large expansion of education, the high population growth and a 
rapid acceleration of urbanization (World Bank 2010) all contribute to a large and increasing 
percentage of people in the micro and small enterprise (MSE2) sector. Some of these MSEs, 
however, have a large potential for income and employment growth but are lacking the necessary 
skills, services, finance and support to grow their businesses. 
 
2. 
MSEs will have to play a major role during the transformation of the Ethiopian 
economy. Experience from a range of countries indicate that the Ethiopian economic growth will 
not continue unless a structural transformation takes place where workers move from subsistence 
agriculture to higher productivity activities.3 The manufacturing sector, which has played the 
lead role in initial stages of such transformations, has been growing in value terms at similar 
rates as GDP in Ethiopia but remains miniscule in comparison to the total labor force. Only 
around 13 percent of the employed population in urban areas is engaged in manufacturing as of 
2011, and the corresponding annual growth in employment has been a modest 4 percent during 
the last three years (CSA 2009, 2010 and 2011). While there are many initiatives in Ethiopia to 
spur high-productive labor intensive production, where the expansion of the rose farm industry is 
one success story, it is also recognized that the micro and small enterprises have to play a role in 
the transformation (Government of Ethiopia Growth and Transformation Plan 2010/11 – 
2014/15, World Bank 2011). 
 
3. 
Unleashing the potential of women in the economic sector would increase GDP 
growth substantially. Recent estimates illustrate the potential of including women in the 
economic sectors: reducing gender inequalities in education and the labor market could increase 
the annual GDP growth in the country by around 1.9 percentage points (World Bank 2008)4. 
Women are marginalized in the business realm in similar ways as in education and the labor 
market. Although the potential of unleashing women entrepreneurs is recognized, no estimate of 
                                                 
2 The Government of Ethiopia MSE Strategy 2011 definitions are applied throughout the PAD: A Microenterprise is 
defined as a private service/manufacturing business with less than Birr 50,000/100,000 (USD 3,000/6,000) in total 
assets excluding buildings and/or less than five employees including family members. A small enterprise is defined 
as a private service/manufacturing business with assets in the range Birr 50,000 - 500,000/Birr 100,000 - 1.5 Million 
(USD 3,000 – 30,000/USD 6,000 to USD 90,000) and/or 6-30 employees. If there is conflict between the two 
criteria, value of assets will determine classification. 
3 World Bank (2011): ―Light Manufacturing in Africa‖, Volume I. 
4 World Bank (2008): ―Unleashing the Potential of Ethiopian Women‖.  
 
2
the likely impacts on GDP is available (World Bank 2009a). Moreover, data confirms the 
disadvantaged position of women in the economic sectors. The unemployment rate among 
females is more than twice as large as that of males in urban areas (CSA 2010), the wage gap 
between men and women with similar background for doing the same job is around 50 percent 
(World Bank 2009a), the share of women without education is almost twice as high as that of 
men,5 microenterprises owned by women earn only a fraction of those owned by men (World 
Bank 2009b), and women face much larger barriers for doing business than men do (World Bank 
2009c). Taking into account the economic potential of women in the society, business 
operations, asset ownership, investment and decision-making, the GDP gains of reducing gender 
inequalities for the economy as a whole is likely to be higher than the above estimate for 
education and the labor market. 
 
4. 
Supporting female entrepreneurs may be one of the most viable approaches for 
realizing the economic potential of the current generations of women– and hence for 
increasing economic growth, creating employment and promoting gender equality. The 
constraints women entrepreneurs are facing are lack of access to finance, land, training, 
education, and effective business networks (Triodos Facet 2011). Particularly, Microfinance in 
Ethiopia has a low coverage for women and do not provide suitable financing for women 
entrepreneurs. Together with the underdevelopment of the financial sector, this suggests a large 
potential for micro finance services. Moreover, in terms of employment in urban areas, the 
private sector consists mainly of MSEs. According to the 2011 Urban Employment 
Unemployment Survey, over 50 percent of the employed women in urban areas operate or work 
for MSEs, which is their main vehicle for income generation.  
 
5. 
The Government has a strong interest in supporting the MSE sector, particularly 
for increasing women‟s income. MSE development is key to the GoE‘s efforts to increase the 
economic empowerment of women, and the development of small scale income generating 
activities for women is a specific aim of the new 5-year plan of the Government – the Growth 
and Transformation Plan 2011-2015 (GTP). The Micro Finance Institution (MFI) sector is also 
of particular importance to the GoE. The new National Microfinance Strategy has been 
circulated, and the GTP specifically addresses the issue of raising the number of female clients to 
access loans from MFIs. In addition, the GoE‘s National Action Plan for Gender (NAP) aims at 
eliminating gender and cultural biases that hinder women from participating equally in economic 
engagements. The Development and Change Package of Ethiopian Women developed by the 
MoWY&CA clearly outlines the Government‘s view that development of micro and small 
enterprises has a key role in generating employment for women.  
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
6. 
The smaller the business, the lower is productivity, so making MSEs grow is key to 
income growth. However, MSE growth is limited by entrepreneurs‘ low education, skills and 
knowledge (technical, entrepreneurial and managerial). Given that skills and knowledge are 
important for business development and growth, this is a main challenge for Ethiopian MSEs. 
                                                 
5 The Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey 2011, preliminary version. More precisely, women without 
education in the age group 15 to 49 account for 50.8 percent, while the corresponding figure for men is 29.5 percent.  
 
3
Unfortunately, the availability of training is limited and the quality of services is often low. Only 
7 percent of all MSEs and 6 percent of women in MSEs had access to training (Ethiopia 
Development and Research Institute -EDRI, 2004). Moreover, the training is not tailored well to 
the needs of those who manage these enterprises, particularly the needs of female entrepreneurs 
(Triodos Facet 2011, Grunder 2010). 
 
7. 
Lack of access to finance is one of the biggest constraints for MSE development in 
Ethiopia (GTZ 2007, World Bank 2009b, Triodos Facet 2011). Ethiopia is among the most 
under banked countries in Sub-Saharan Africa (2010 Doing Business), and access to finance is 
listed as the most severe hindrance by entrepreneurs themselves. The Ethiopian microfinance 
sector is relatively young (started in 1997) and consists of 31 regulated MFIs that reach over 2.5 
million clients (June 2011) with an outstanding loan balance of Birr 6.5 billion (384 million 
USD) and a balance of saving of Birr 3.4 billion (199 million USD). The MFIs have a rural 
orientation and largely work with the group-lending methodology. The industry is very 
concentrated, with more than 80 percent of the clients (and more than 90 percent of outstanding 
loans) being served by the 5 largest MFIs. Moreover, as these large MFIs are restricted to their 
own ―territory‖ – being one of the regions – competition in the industry is very limited. These 5 
largest MFIs are also very much influenced by their respective regional governments, which 
practically own the MFI and provide below market-rate funds. MFIs are supervised by the 
National Bank of Ethiopia and operate within a clear regulatory framework6. The Ethiopia 
Investment Climate Assessment 2006 finds the huge collateral requirement to be a critical 
obstacle as the value of collateral is one of the highest in the developing world (173 percent of 
loan amount). Women entrepreneurs face higher barriers than men, especially in providing 
collateral. Most assets accepted by lenders are registered to men and there are cultural barriers 
for women using collateral, so this avenue of finance is almost closed for female entrepreneurs. 
Even if the number of microfinance institutions doubled in the last decade and total lending and 
number of clients has increased rapidly, the situation for individual female entrepreneurs in the 
cities remains the same. MFI lending is almost entirely group based and the average loan size is 
very low – only Birr 2,200 (USD 140) in 2009. Hence, the current MFI lending practice is not 
suited for growth-oriented women entrepreneurs. 
 
8. 
Substantial opportunities exist to increase earnings of existing MSEs by providing 
the operators with the necessary entrepreneurial and technical skills, facilitating the utilization of 
more productive technologies and making finance for such investments available. High import 
costs result in high prices on most imported goods, giving considerable scope to domestic 
entrepreneurs to profit from this price differential. Moreover, since well-managed light 
manufacturing firms in Ethiopia has a comparable productivity to similar firms in China, there is 
a huge untapped potential for Ethiopian entrepreneurs to use existing simple technologies to 
compete with imports of simple manufactured products (World Bank 2011). In Ethiopia, three 
government technical institutes are mandated to provide technical support and technology 
transfer to selected manufacturing industries – the Textile Industry Development Institute, the 
Leather Development Institute and the Metal Industry Development Institute. These have 
attracted quite some donor attention and support given the perceived potential in these sectors for 
export, income and employment growth. This upgrading of the institutes can also benefit MSEs 
                                                 
6 See NBE proclamation no. 40/1996 and no. 626/2009 together with NBE directive no. 18/2006. 
 
4
through transfer of technology and technical assistance especially to strengthen the clusters in the 
cities.   
 
9. 
The new GoE MSE Strategy provides a coherent and suitable framework for 
support to growth-oriented female operated MSEs aiming at improving the provision of 
demand-driven business development services, high quality technical training and technology 
transfer. Nevertheless, there are different levels of understanding and practice in implementing 
institutions (REMSEDA, Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) institutions 
and One Stop Shops) with respect to how the new strategy should guide the support. In 
particular, there is not a clear understanding and appreciation of demand driven approaches, the 
benefits of stimulating competition and the role of private initiative and entrepreneurship. It will 
be critical to create a level of awareness of the new strategies for MSE development, build 
capacity in all implementing institutions and shift the mindset of involved personnel away from 
central planning and towards market based approaches. This process will enable them to respond 
to the demands of the changing environment. 
 
 
C. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes 
 
10. 
The higher-level goal of the WEDP is to supplement the other interventions in 
Ethiopia to accelerate broad-based sustained growth for employment creation and poverty 
reduction in urban areas. The WEDP complements several other programs and investments in 
Ethiopia. In particular, it provides a platform to stimulate growth in urban areas complementing 
the growth-oriented rural Bank funded programs like the Agricultural Growth Program (AGP), 
the Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP) and Sustainable Land Management Program 
(SLMP). The WEDP also complements and is integrated with several major donors‘ efforts to 
expand finance and support entrepreneurship: The KfW Capital Link project provides guarantees 
for private banks‘ on-lending to MFIs, the USAID DCA provides guarantees to private banks to 
lend to female entrepreneurs with medium businesses, and the RUFIP (Rural Financial 
Intermediation Program) funded by IFAD and AfDB provides loans to MFIs for on-lending to 
people in rural areas.  
 
11. 
The WEDP also aims to help achieve the government‟s five year poverty reduction 
strategy (the GTP) and the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The WEDP will 
constitute one implementing tool for achieving the GTP aims in the MSE sector and will 
contribute to the first MDG by reducing the number of people exposed to poverty through 
employment creation within participating MSEs. The program will also contribute to the third 
MDG by promoting gender equality and empowering women – especially through building skills 
and knowledge and contributing to their employment and economic independence. Finally, the 
WEDP contributes to MDG 8 on partnerships and the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness 
through the substantial donor coordination approach taken in the preparation and implementation 
of the program. 
 
12. 
The WEDP will contribute to the fulfillment of the World Bank Africa Strategy 
2011-2016, particularly Pillar I (Competitiveness and Employment) by stimulating urban 
economic growth and employment generation, and the World Bank‟s Road Map to Gender  
 
5
Mainstreaming ( 2011 -2013) by focusing on the “economic empowerment” of women. The 
WEDP will increase productivity in the MSE sector and create new economic opportunities in 
the major cities through demand and supply linkages and through direct support of new activities 
and introduction of profitable investments for the female entrepreneurs. This in turn will lead to 
an increase in employment opportunities – especially among women as female entrepreneurs 
tend to hire more women than men. The WEDP will also decrease the vulnerability of urban 
households to economic shocks – particularly the recurring food price shocks - since higher 
incomes will enable them to create buffers to mitigate impacts of price spikes. Through 
transparency in all components of the program—in particular, by emphasizing outreach and 
citizen feedback, providing a mechanism for entrepreneurs themselves to suggest improvements 
in the program, and building knowledge—the WEDP will also contribute to improved 
governance and accountability.

13. 
The project development objective of the WEDP is to increase the earnings and 
employment of MSEs owned or partly owned by the participating female entrepreneurs in the 
targeted cities. This will be achieved by: i) tailoring financial instruments to the needs of the 
participants and ensuring availability of finance; and ii) developing the entrepreneurial and 
technical skills of the target group and supporting cluster7, technology and product development 
for their businesses. 
 
14. 
Key PDO results indicators will be (1) enterprise earnings and (2) enterprise 
employment. In addition, intermediate results indicators for the sub-components are included; for 
details refer to the Results Framework, Annex 1. 
 
15. 
The project beneficiaries are micro and small enterprises in the targeted areas that are: 
owned or partly owned by women entrepreneurs, not full-time in school, and who are committed 
to growing their enterprise.  
 
16. 
The program is designed so that female entrepreneur participants choose the 
WEDP activity that is most beneficial for growing their MSE, and no compulsory 
combination or sequence of activities is imposed. Women interested in participating in WEDP 
and fulfilling the criteria for project beneficiaries listed above will be issued a WEDP 
membership card before any WEDP finance, training or services are granted. The members will 
go through different selection criteria depending on the specific WEDP activity: (1) Those who 
seek finance will go through an ―eligibility for finance and granting procedure for growth-
oriented female entrepreneurs‖ as determined by the financial institution involved, (2) those who 
want to be trained will be deemed eligible by a skills enhancement/training and selecting 
mechanism, and (3) participants within clusters chosen for WEDP support will be qualified by a 
separate set of criteria. Estimates of demand for microfinance and projections of loan 
disbursement suggest that the WEDP funds for this component will cater for at least 17.500 
                                                 
7 Industrial clusters are the concentration of economic activities of a certain sector in a certain location producing similar and closely related 
goods. Industrial clusters provide a wide range of advantages that enable enterprises become competitive and profitable. These advantages could 
be generated either through unplanned positive externalities such as industry specialization, labor pooling, and knowledge spillovers or through a 
deliberate joint action.  
 
6
women entrepreneurs8. Given the indications from the targeted group that training and skills 
development are necessary to grow their business, the aim of the entrepreneurial and technical 
skill enhancement is to offer such training to all WEDP members that takes WEDP 
microfinance. Adding the estimated number of WEDP members that would only seek training 
indicates that the total number of WEDP participants will be around 20,000 female 
entrepreneurs. Further details of the selection processes and expected number of participants are 
presented under each component, below.  
 
17. 
WEDP will be a national urban project covering the four major cities in four regions: 
Mekele in Tigray, Bahar Dar in Amhara, Hawwasa in SNNP and Adama in Oromiya and the two 
chartered cities, Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa. Neighboring suburbs and satellite cities may be 
included based on the available resources and capacity for program implementation. The exact 
definition of eligible cities will be detailed in the Project Implementation Manual and 
Operational Manual. The project will undertake a resource and implementation assessment for 
Harar and the four emerging regions (Afar, Somali, Benishangul-Gumuz and Gambela) during 
project implementation to come up with recommendations to expand WEDP activities to these 
four regions in the future.

A. Project Components 
 
18. 
The Project has three components with a total investment of USD 53 million, each 
described below (See Annex 2 for a detailed project description). 
 
Component 1: Access to Microfinance.  (USD 45.4 million) 
 
19. 
The aim of the component is to facilitate access to financial services for female growth- 
oriented entrepreneurs by providing working capital and investment finance through a dedicated 
line of credit. At the same time, the component aims at improving the capacity of existing MFIs 
to serve female growth-oriented entrepreneurs with tailored financial products. The component is 
based on a two-tier structure where the Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE) will act as an MSE 
finance wholesaler engaged in the business of lending to qualified Participating Financial 
Institutions (PFIs) with the specific requirement of on-lending only to female-owned or partly 
female-owned micro and small enterprises. The PFIs will engage in the retail distribution of sub 
loans to this specific target of MSE clients. The lending activities operated by DBE and the MFIs 
triggers OP 8.30 Financial Intermediary Lending, and WEDP has been designed to fully comply 
with this operational policy (refer to Annex 6 for compliance and clearance). 
 
20. 
Women entrepreneurs eligible for applying for the financial products provided under 
WEDP would be women with full ownership of an MSE or who are at least part-owner of the 
enterprise and have a growth-oriented business - as assessed by the PFIs. The PFIs will develop 
                                                 
8 WEDP team‘s projections based on a gradually increasing number of borrowers and average loan size throughout 
the WEPD implementation. 
 
7
their own assessment criteria and will determine the granting of finance among eligible women 
entrepreneurs.  
 
21. 
The component will consist of two closely interlinked sub-components: (i) a Credit 
Facility in DBE for on lending to Participating Financial Institutions which in turn will on-lend 
to female-owned/partly female-owned MSEs and (ii) a TA Facility to support: (a) capacity 
building and MSE loan administration in the PFIs; and (b) capacity building of the project 
management team (PMT) within DBE.  
 
22. 
The design of the component follows two guiding principles: on one side removing the 
obstacles to access to finance for the targeted women entrepreneurs; on the other side it aims at 
using, to the maximum extent possible, existing institutions and services, in order to avoid 
duplications.   
 
23. 
The project uses an incentive approach to support MFI up-scaling to supply loans on an 
individual basis9 and other tailored financial products to female-owned/partly female-owned 
MSEs. The incentive approach would combine the provision of appropriate financing 
instruments to PFIs (i.e. line of credit) with commitments from participating institutions to 
strengthen their lending capability to female owned/partly female-owned MSEs over time. 
Technical assistance will be a mandatory condition for PFIs to access the Credit Facility. 
 
24. 
The project plans to establish a dedicated PMT under the DBE. This PMT will act as an 
MSE finance wholesaler engaged in the business of lending to qualified PFIs with the specific 
requirement of on-lending (and providing additional financial products) only to female-
owned/partly female-owned MSEs . The PFIs will engage in the retail distribution of sub loans to 
this specific target of MSE clients.  
 
25. 
Via the two-tier institutional framework, this component will introduce international best 
practices in Ethiopia and promote the engagement in individual lending (versus group lending) in 
providing efficient financial services to female-owned/partly female-owned MSEs. The 
institutional capacity building of both the PMT in DBE and PFIs will be provided by a 
consulting firm with a proven track record of international experience on similar capacity 
building assignment. The institutional and human resource development components of the 
project are intended to create the culture and lay the foundation for a wider promotion of 
financial services to micro and small entrepreneurs throughout the country. 
 
26. 
Subcomponent 1a: Credit facility (USD 42.4 million). This sub-component will consist 
of a credit facility in DBE for on lending to PFIs for the purpose of on-lending to female-
owned/partly female-owned MSEs. Despite the distortions existing in the Ethiopian financial 
sector, the subcomponent has been designed in compliance with OP 8.30 requirements (Annex 
6). The PMT under DBE will provide medium-term subsidiary loans in domestic currency to 
PFIs, with maturity from 3 to 5 years in accordance with the Subsidiary Loan Agreements 
between DBE and individual PFIs. DBE would make arrangements for on-lending the funds to 
the selected PFIs against the prior month‘s loan book or against a loan demand schedule to be 
prepared by the PFI in advance. Once the allocated amount is drawn down, the PFI would be free 
                                                 
9 Although traditional group lending will not be excluded. 
 
8
to revolve the loan as long as it utilizes the funds for supporting female-owned/partly female-
owned MSEs, in conformity with the WEDP guidelines. With the support and technical 
assistance from the TA Facility, the PFIs will set their preferred lending conditions and design 
the most appropriate instruments to serve the target segment. DBE will assume the full credit risk 
on the PFIs and the PFIs will assume full credit risk on the final beneficiaries. DBE will not lend 
directly to MSEs. 
 
27. 
Targeted PFIs will include both government supported and other (NGO or donor backed 
or fully private) registered MFIs currently regulated and supervised by the National Bank of 
Ethiopia (NBE). A list of potential PFIs have been assessed based on clear eligibility criteria (see 
Attachment 1, Annex 2).This due diligence process will ensure minimum performance and 
profitability of the PFIs. Table 1 below gives basic information about the most likely MFI 
candidates for WEDP. 
 
Table 1: Basic information about the potential PFIs. 
 
 
 
 
28. 
The selection criteria takes into account PFI ownership and financial situation, 
institutional and management capacity, interest in and commitment to servicing the female-
owned/partly female-owned MSE market, quality of financial reporting and governance, 
willingness to strictly adopt and adhere to prescribed policies and procedures and to utilize the 
TA facility. 
 
29. 
All PFIs will be required to enter Technical Cooperation Agreements (TCAs) and 
subsidiary loan agreements (SLAs). The mandatory technical assistance, and consequently the 
access to the line of credit, will be phased in gradually. Additional PFIs can be added 
subsequently, subject to their compliance with the set of required eligibility criteria.   
 
30. 
Subcomponent 1b: TA facility (USD 3million). A critical success factor and a key goal 
of the project are to build the institutional and human resource capacity of PFIs to effectively 
service the female MSE client market. An assessment study of selected Ethiopian MFIs 
conducted in December 2011 revealed a number of institutional weaknesses which need to be 
addressed in order to ensure that PFIs are able to properly utilize funds received through the 
program and support the WEDP target group with relevant, timely services. In particular, 
weaknesses were noted in the areas of cash-flow-based lending techniques, savings mobilization, 
financial and operational reporting, risk management and corporate governance.  
ADCSI
ACSI
DECSI
OCSSCO
SFPI
Wasasa
Harbu
OMO
Average
Total
Q1 2011-12
Q1 2011-12 Q1 2011-12 Q1 2011-12 Q1 2011-12 Q1 2011-12 Q1 2011-12
Q1 2011-12
Q1 2011-12
Q1 2011-12
GENERAL INFORMATION
Number of branches
134
238
157
249
10
24
13
168
124
993
Number of employees
690
3,000
2,041
2,407
168
225
88
1,263
1,235
9,882
Number of outstanding loans
159,783
689,951
392,639
515,280
33,421
55,866
19,359
382,405
281,088
2,248,704
Percent of women borrowers
64%
68%
51%
37%
56.3%
43.8%
47.2%
30.3%
50%
Average loan amount (USD)
205
165
281
149
101
127
89
108
153
Government ownership (%)
96%
25%
25%
83%
0%
0%
0%
80%
39%
BALANCE SHEET SUMMARY (USD)
Total assets
45,102,650 195,231,508 155,945,657 95,300,010
4,988,949
8,138,070
2,224,018
50,249,227
69,647,511 557,180,089
Net loans
32,240,577 111,370,377 107,504,628 75,265,986
3,294,712
6,960,469
1,685,636
36,457,709
46,847,512 374,780,093
Total deposits
10,169,317
84,499,941
57,285,914 46,255,892
1,303,928
2,041,725
629,556
18,776,723
27,620,374 220,962,995
Equity
22,845,936
56,162,898
39,625,307 25,684,725
1,993,288
2,865,126
959,121
11,454,809
20,198,901 161,591,209
 
9
 
31. 
In order to make the credit facility effective, PFIs will receive a mandatory, specific, 
high-quality, technical assistance by a consulting firm with proven relevant international 
experience to help build capacity in individual lending/financial services to female-owned/partly 
female-owned MSEs before any credit is given. This capacity building will enable PFI officials 
and staff to serve female MSE operators adequately - training them in assessing MSE business 
proposals, individual lending provision, gender-sensitive customer care, and developing suitable 
financial products for the target group. This will be done in partnership with DFID. All the cost 
related to this component will be covered by DFID. 
 
32. 
The TA facility will work with the PFIs in developing and executing a plan for absorbing 
and applying international best practices and credit technologies. New or existing MSE finance 
departments that will be set up/empowered by PFIs as a condition of their participation in the 
project will be the main focus of this TA. The TA will include training PFI loan officers and the 
MSE extension staff at the One Stop Shops, strengthening lending policies and procedures, 
putting in place the prerequisites for the accounting, risk management and management 
information systems, supporting sub-loan application preparation, screening and decision-
making, and supporting sub-loan monitoring and collections. 
 
33. 
To benefit from subcomponent 1b, PFIs will be required to enter into TCA with the PMT 
in DBE. Under such agreements, PFIs will receive TA free of charge for a period deemed 
appropriate after the initial gap assessment for building the necessary capacity to undertake the 
WEDP assignment. The PFIs will have access to the Credit Facility only if they enter into such 
TCA with the PMT, since the success of the Credit Facility depends on the application of 
modern MSE lending technologies, introduction of gender sensitive products and the capacity of 
loan administration within PFIs.  
 
Component 2: Entrepreneurial skills, technology and cluster development (USD 
6.1million) 
 
34. 
The aim of this component is to develop growth-oriented women entrepreneurs‟ 
skills, facilitate their access to more productive technologies that can raise their incomes, and 
help unleash synergies from clustering. This will be achieved through designing and 
implementing a capacity building technical assistance program to strengthen the capacity of the 
institutions that will provide direct services to the WEDP participants, particularly the One Stop 
Shops and TVET colleges, and the supporting/coordinating institutions such as the City MSE 
Development Offices.  
 
35. 
FeMSEDA will have the direct responsibility for planning, designing and 
coordinating Component 2 in close collaboration with the National TVET Agency. FEMSEDA 
will also have the overall responsibility for ensuring the implementation of the delivery of high 
quality training and support to WEDP members along two main subcomponents; (1) 
entrepreneurship training, technical skills enhancement, technology development and mentoring 
and (2) cluster development. 
 
 
10
36. 
WEDP members will have to apply for the training module(s) they see most suited 
to their needs. The capacity building will aim to develop functional and relevant training 
modules suitable to the needs of WEDP members seeking entrepreneurial and technical skills 
enhancement. Based on individual participation, the WEDP member will be enrolled in the 
module of interest if she meets the following criteria: 
 
 
having sufficient numeracy and literacy skills to follow the training as determined by the 
provider of training 
 
committed  to focusing on business as a full-time activity, and 
 
willing to pay a commitment fee for the training.  
 
37. 
FeMSEDA will coordinate with relevant implementing institutions to develop an 
annual training plan for all entrepreneurship skills and technical training modules required 
under WEDP. The training plan will have two components: i) Detailing the capacity building of 
the implementing agencies and relevant staff (ReMSEDAs, City MSE Offices, TVET institutes 
and the OSS); and ii) Detailing the training modules for the WEDP entrepreneurs. It will be 
FeMSEDA‘s responsibility that necessary curricula and training material for all WEDP training 
modules are developed and made available to the institutions. All staff in implementing 
institutions will have to go through an orientation on the principles of private sector development 
programs, the functioning of markets, demand-based approaches and the role of entrepreneurs in 
economic growth of a country. 
 
38. 
WEDP participants will be required to fill out feedback-forms on the relevance, 
quality and usefulness of services and trainings provided throughout the program.  This feedback 
as well as the collection of quantitative and qualitative data (e.g. evaluation questionnaire, focus 
group discussions, etc.) will enable FeMSEDA and the TVET institutions, on one side to monitor 
the process and revise the support accordingly, and on the other side to identify potential social 
issues and other challenges and take corrective actions. 
 
39. 
Subcomponent 2a: Entrepreneurship and technology development. This subcomponent 
will build capacity to ensure delivery of basic and advanced entrepreneurship training, support in 
utilizing more productive technology, coaching and mentoring and business information to 
growth-oriented women entrepreneurs eager to develop their entrepreneurial skills, improve the 
quality of their product and services, and invest in more productive technology or access new 
markets. The initial needs assessment of training and related services will be conducted by One 
Stop Shops (20 in Addis Ababa and 5 for each of the other cities).  A more comprehensive 
training needs assessment of the entrepreneurs will be conducted by the TVETs colleges. This 
will result in more specific training recommendations to the entr

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

 specific constraints many women entrepreneurs 
face such as time, mobility and level of education. The basic business skills and entrepreneurship 
training will be provided through classroom lessons and workshops with practical examples at 
TVET colleges to improve their entrepreneurial, business and financial management skills. 
Existing training modules used by TVETs will be reviewed and updated and adapted, and new 
modules may be developed to meet the different needs of the entrepreneurs. The advanced 
training will provide skills for the entrepreneurs with growing and more complex MSEs, and 
could include managing financial portfolio, business financing and investment, business 
expansion, laws and regulations, registration and licensing, advanced marketing, market and 
profit analysis, contract management and labor management. A specific MSE business and 
technology development program will be developed within the TVET colleges for addressing 
challenges to using more productive and appropriate technology, address production capacity 
constraints and quality/standard issues of products and services of MSEs. This will be designed 
so as to cater to the needs of the target group as separate from the high school graduates entering 
the TVET training colleges. 
 
44. 
After completing a training module, entrepreneurs will be required to provide a one page 
‗action plan‘ that specifies how the knowledge provided will be implemented in her business. 
This will both serve to ensure a practical focus of the training and provide feedback to 
 
12
facilitators/trainers whether the entrepreneur was able to understand the content in a useful way. 
This would also serve as basis for further advice and coaching purposes. 
 
45. 
Women entrepreneurs will also be provided with business advice services in OSS on 
demand in order to deal with specific business challenges. This service could include basic 
support, such as filling in loan applications, how to assess market prices or identifying sources of 
supply of inputs. Market studies will be conducted in the localities to identify high potential 
businesses ideas in subsectors and to provide up-to-date, relevant and reliable market 
information to serve as pointers for the women enterprises. Information resulting from the 
different market studies will support the OSS staff in orienting women entrepreneurs towards 
specific business opportunities in different sectors and sub-sectors suitable to the WEDP 
members. Complemented by the TVET training, these services will be geared towards 
supporting the women MSEs to respond to the existing demand – or stimulating the potential 
demand.  
 
46. 
City MSE Offices and ReMSEDAs will, in conjunction with women entrepreneurs 
associations, chambers of commerce and other relevant private institutions, organize events to 
promote mentoring arrangements and linkages between entrepreneurs. The private institutions 
can identify experienced entrepreneurs who would volunteer to mentor or coach WEDP 
members on a regular basis, and co-organize the events to let the women MSEs link with the 
resource persons on a mutually agreed basis. Mentors and coaches will go through a basic 
orientation on aims and responsibilities. Women entrepreneurs associations, chambers of 
commerce and other business associations will be encouraged to create space for networking and 
to develop linkages between WEDP participants and other successful entrepreneurs to share 
information and experiences. 
 
47. 
All personnel in the OSSs selected for WEDP will be required to take a course with 
topics on competition, markets, doing business and the role of public support to the private 
sector. The aim is to create a change in mindset towards an appreciation of demand driven 
approaches and an understanding of the benefits of stimulating competition. Moreover, the role 
of private initiative and entrepreneurship in growing businesses will be elaborated. This training 
will also include customer care, communication, net working and information management to 
enable OSS staff to play the key role of entry point for women entrepreneurs seeking information 
and advice and enable them to respond to changing demands in a changing environment. 
 
48. 
In addition to support for skill development, some upgrading of the OSS offices will be 
included. This will serve a double purpose: A welcoming and user friendly environment will be 
more attractive for users as well as for personnel, and an upgrade in the OSS equipment 
(including transport and informational technology) will represent an additional incentive for the 
personnel, in order to mitigate the high turn-over in these institutions.   
 
49. 
Subcomponent 2b: Cluster Development. WEDP will support cluster development 
according to international best practice and in a way that spurs income and employment growth 
for female owned/partly female-owned MSEs.  Industrial clusters are the concentration of 
economic activities of a certain sector in a certain location producing similar and closely related 
goods. Industrial clusters provide a wide range of advantages that enable enterprises become 
 
13
competitive and profitable. These advantages could be generated either through unplanned 
positive externalities such as industry specialization, labor pooling, and knowledge spillovers or 
through deliberate joint actions. Such joint actions may include bulk purchase and storage of raw 
materials, combined marketing campaign, joint advertising, joint purchase and hiring of 
equipment, joint lobbying of local authorities, joint application of credit, etc. Joint actions in 
clusters do not emerge automatically and require efforts for the identification and achievement of 
shared goals and depend on the gradual process of trust building and coordination. 
 
50. 
WEDP will support natural clusters within the chosen sectors mainly through facilitating 
market linkages and technology transfer and inducing network and joint actions among 
entrepreneurs in order to help boost their collective power and innovate their ways of doing 
business. The approach will be based on the lessons learned from the UNIDO cluster 
development program for MSEs implemented in four natural clusters in Ethiopia from 2005 until 
2009. A key principle was to train agents who operate as impartial facilitators among cluster 
actors and help them share information and coordinate their endeavors. These facilitators known 
as cluster development agents (CDAs) worked on a daily basis in a specific cluster supporting all 
stages of technical assistance starting from the formulation of a diagnostic study that help 
identify core problems faced in the cluster, to organizing and coordinating collective activities, 
promoting and coaching business networks, facilitating linkages with input suppliers, designers, 
training institutions and medium and large scale firm, in order to solve the identified problems.  
 
51. 
It will be the City MSE Development offices in each of the 6 target cities that assess and 
identify natural clusters with potential (as identified in the project development objective, see 
paragraph 13 above) for WEDP support in their city. The City MSE Office will select natural 
cluster(s) that is to be supported under WEDP based on the following criteria: 
- 
natural clusters in the priority sectors selected by the government. 
- 
natural clusters that have potential for rapid growth and employment generation. 
- 
clusters where a good proportion of the members are women and/or sectors where a 
lot of women operate in and can potentially be supported as a cluster (like pottery, 
spinning, bamboo crafting and food processing). 
- 
clusters that are accessible to various supporting institutions and operate in areas that 
have appropriate infrastructure. 
 
52. 
The cluster training program will be based on the need assessment of the potentially 
growth-oriented clusters to be supported under WEDP based on the criteria mentioned above, 
and will also include a program for training the CDAs. Mapping of existing clusters and 
identification of the various stakeholders and partners that can contribute to the clusters‘ 
development will be conducted such as input suppliers, output buyers and sectoral associations. 
 
53. 
The core problems in each cluster will be identified through a diagnostic study and a 
work plan will be formulated in order to solve these problems through networking and joint 
actions. This will be done by the CDAs, who are staff members of the OSS. Among the various 
facilitators working at the OSS, potential candidates will be identified as CDAs by City MSE 
Office. The selection of the CDA at the OSS will be based on his/her commitment for intense 
pro-active interaction with all local players and institutional partners and flexibility to deal with 
various administrative bodies in mobilizing their support for the cluster. 
 
14
 
54. 
The training module for CDAs will include the specifics of cluster development, conflict 
management and resolution, gender issues, network building and project management and 
evaluation. The CDA training will be managed by FEMSEDA and conducted by a qualified 
institution or consultant in collaboration with FeMSEDA in-house CDA expertise. Moreover, the 
training will provide guidelines on how to best support women entrepreneurs across the value 
chain in clusters without jeopardizing the existing forward and backward linkages and networks 
with the existing male entrepreneurs in the cluster.  
 
 
Component 3: Project Management, advocacy and outreach, Monitoring & Evaluation 
and Impact Evaluation (USD 1.5 million) 
 
55. 
Subcomponent 3a Project Management Team (USD 0.35 million) will establish a 
National Project Management Team (NPMT) within FeMSEDA under the Ministry of Urban 
Development and Construction (MoUDC). The operational responsibility for the project 
implementation in the regions will rest with the City Offices, MFIs and TVET colleges using 
OSS as the entry point. The existing federal coordinating body for MSE development, the 
National MSE Development Council, will be supplemented with representatives of the Chamber 
of Commerce and Sectoral Association and the Ethiopian Women Entrepreneurs Association and 
will have the overall coordinating role of the WEDP. This will ensure coordination and support 
from the multiple sectors involved in the project.  
 
56. 
Subcomponent 3b Communication, advocacy and outreach (USD 0.35 million) will build 
awareness; expand the outreach and understanding and acceptance of WEDP among (1) the 
beneficiaries and (2) relevant stakeholders, especially the husbands of the participants who will 
receive a tailored information package to ensure consent. Potential WEDP participants will be 
given detailed and thorough information about the different components of the program and the 
respective application and selection procedures, the aims and the requirements of participants. It 
will ensure that the objectives of the project as well as the methods for attaining them are clearly 
understood and help increase political and social commitment and contribute to the development 
objective of the project. This will  be achieved through information workshops, trainings to 
federal, regional and woreda level implementers and will include preparation and publication of 
materials aimed at raising entrepreneurship awareness. 
 
57. 
This subcomponent will ensure public access to information to make transparency a 
foundation of WEDP. Information about the project components, procedures, complaint 
mechanisms, processes (especially criteria for selecting participants) and the role and 
responsibilities of each stakeholders will be publicly available at all levels. Microfinance 
application procedures, entrepreneurial skills development opportunities, means of benefiting 
from the technology and product development processes would be made clear using various 
channels including meetings, broadcast through public media such as newspapers, mobile 
phones, radio and TV.  
 
58. 
In addition, this subcomponent will document and disseminate results, lessons learned 
and good practices. Successful beneficiaries will be recognized and promoted by publicizing 
 
15
their achievements and contributions to the development process and poverty reduction. 
Beneficiary testimonials and other channels will be used to spread success stories, document and 
disseminate good practices and lessons learned. Showcasing examples of successful 
collaborations between government officials, MFIs, project beneficiaries and other relevant 
stakeholders will be used to strengthen partnerships and build strategic alliances among 
stakeholders. In addition, it will help build a dynamic and evolving knowledge base to improve 
the quality of the project activities. 
 
59. 
Subcomponent 3c Monitoring & Evaluation (USD 0.3 million): The NPMT will be 
responsible for developing and establishing a suitable monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system 
to accurately track and assess the progress of WEDP implementation. This includes the 
identification of mechanisms and methodologies to continuously benchmark the main inputs and 
outputs as well as to measure outcomes on the basis of the objectives and targets specified in the 
sections above. In addition, the M&E system will prepare and disseminate quarterly reports as 
well as meaningful feedback to the NPMT on the advancement of the activities within the scope 
of the project and in compliance with the guidelines and procedures developed in the PIM.10 The 
WEDP implementing institutions that will collect data and report progress for the WEDP M&E 
system will assign direct responsibility for these tasks to staff with adequate competencies to 
ensure the fulfillment of all reporting requirements. 
 
60. 
The NPMT will contract a highly qualified consultant with documented relevant 
experience to development a turn-key WEDP M&E system including the design of required 
informational channels based on the processes and procedures that will be outlined in the PIM. 
This consultancy will also detail the responsibilities of implementing agencies for accurate and 
timely reporting. Although the data collection and reporting on WEDP will be based on the 
existing structures and FeMSEDA's own M&E system, the consultant will be required to 
highlight selective but necessary additions and adoptions in order to provide the full overview of 
WEDP activities and progress in a coherent manner. This may also include the development or 
alignment of reporting templates. Issuing WEDP membership in the OSS will provide the 
foundation for tracking relevant activities of WEDP entrepreneurs. The consultant will be asked 
to provide recommendations on how to integrate data collected by all implementing institutions, 
namely FeMSEDA, TVET colleges, OSSs and PFIs in order to create a single comprehensive 
database capturing all WEDP activities on participant/member level. This task includes the 
identification of a suitable place within the organizational M&E structure of FeMSEDA for 
placing this database. 
 
61. 
The PFIs will not be asked to change their internal M&E systems or reporting practices. 
However, the PFIs will be required to commit to detailed reporting standards as a prerequisite for 
participating in the WEDP line of credit. PFIs will report necessary WEDP information to the 
PMT at the DBE, which in turn submits aggregated and systematized information to FeMSEDA. 
The DBE PMT will submit various progress reports, the format and required periodicity of 
which will be included in the Operations Manual, including output and outcome indicators (six-
monthly) and financial management reports (FMRs) (quarterly).. The information required from 
the PFIs will include but not be restricted to the results indicators. The performance and 
implementation progress of Component 1 will be monitored through several indicators, in line 
                                                 
10 The PIM will be updated based on the recommendations of the M&E consultancy. 
 
16
with the World Bank Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME) Finance core sector 
indicators: (1) Direct project beneficiaries (borrowers); (2) volume of bank funding: lines of 
credit; (3) volume of bank funding: institutional development; (4) outstanding SME loan 
portfolio; (5) number of active loan accounts; (6) portfolio at risk; (7) number of PFIs that have 
adopted and implemented institution development plans and project-related credit technologies 
and (8) number of trained loan officers. The World Bank team will be working with the DBE 
PMT and the consultants to design the required reporting templates in the Operations Manual, 
and to ensure that the PFIs are well accustomed to collecting such information from their clients. 
The financial performance of the PFIs will be monitored through independent auditors‘ reports 
and separate letters confirming adherence to prudential norms. PFIs will be required to provide 
the relevant data to the project management. 
 
62. 
The initial TA provided to the PFIs will ensure that the institutions are well accustomed 
to collecting the necessary information from their clients and to aggregate the data in order to 
compute the specified indicators. Similarly, TVET is already collecting all necessary information 
for the computation of the relevant results indicators, namely (1) number of direct project 
beneficiaries (trainees) and (2) percentage of trainees passing the end-of-training competency 
test. Additional reporting requirements and monitoring indicators are planned to be specified by 
the M&E consultant.  
 
63. 
Subcomponent 3d: Impact Evaluation (USD 0.5 million): Making impact evaluation an 
integral part of the WEDP reflects the desire expressed by stakeholders to systematically 
investigate the effectiveness of the project. Such analysis will not only allow for a 
comprehensive stocktaking and review of the project's achievements but it will also help to 
identify the underlying mechanisms and constraints affecting its mode of functioning. 
 
64. 
The analysis will be based to a large extent on the quantitative comparison of a treatment 
group with an adequate control group. By definition, access to all or a specific subset of the 
project components is given to the treatment group only. It is crucial, however, to tailor the 
selection of the treatment and the control group to the intervention. This exercise is key to 
guarantee statistical identification of changes that can be causally linked to the intervention. The 
main challenge will lie in identifying project features that offer the potential to select a control 
group sufficiently suitable to allow for the envisaged analysis. Such features include but are not 
restricted to capacity constraints, phase-in stages, treatment status randomization and cut-off 
rules. 
 
65. 
The empirical analysis will mainly build on survey data deliberately collected for this 
purpose: (1) a base-line survey which will be carried out prior to respondents' exposure to any 
relevant intervention activities; (2) an end-line survey which will be administered after the 
project has been well into operation and (3) conditional on sufficient implementation a mid-term 
survey. The information will be collected from representatives of both the treatment group as 
well as the control group. While the empirical analysis will be carried out by impact evaluation 
experts from the World Bank, the data collection will necessarily be contracted out to an 
organization/firm with extensive experience and capacity in the administration of large-scale 
surveys. In addition, an effort will be made to integrate other data sources such as the 
administrative records compiled through the M&E system at the OSS, TVET and PFI level.