[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 51448 chars (26.6% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
1. 
Ethiopia has experienced rapid and stable economic growth over the past decade. 
From 2004 to 2014, real gross domestic product (GDP) growth averaged 10.8 percent per year. 
This is the fastest growth that the country has experienced and is considerably above the average 
achieved by low-income and Sub-Saharan African countries during this period. Recent growth was 
also noticeably stable, as the country avoided the volatility brought by spells of drought and 
conflict, which plagued growth in the past. 
2. 
There has been a significant reduction in poverty. Over the decade from 2004 to 2014, 
real GDP per capita increased on average by 8 percent per year. In 2015, the country ranked 174 
out of 188 in the Human Development Index (HDI) of the United Nations Development Program 
(UNDP). Poverty declined substantially from 55.3 percent in 2000 to 33.5 percent in 2011, 
according to the international poverty line of US$1.90. There has also been significant 
improvement in nutrition, health, education, and access to services. Despite rapid growth, Ethiopia 
remained one of the most equal countries in the world with a Gini coefficient of consumption of 
0.30 in 2011. However, the poorest 15 percent of the population experienced a decline in well-
being during 2005–2011, mainly as a result of higher food prices. 
3. 
The sustained economic growth was driven primarily by structural improvements in 
the economy, as resources moved from low- to high-productivity activities, supported by a 
conducive external environment. International trade has been very dynamic with exports 
increasing more than fivefold between 2000 and 2015 in nominal terms, while volumes increased 
by a magnitude of four, reflecting a positive commodity price effect. Imports increased by a factor 
of 8 over the same period. While the Government has recently laid out ambitious plans to maintain 
this growth performance and for Ethiopia to become a middle-income country by 2025, the global 
external environment has become less conducive, faltering export performance has become a key 
policy concern. 
4. 
The Government’s plan to sustain growth has a strong focus on manufacturing and 
export diversification. The Government’s broad economic strategy is laid out in the second phase 
of the Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II), which seeks to provide the framework to achieve 
growth rates of at least 10 percent per year up to 2025. The plan has a strong focus on making 
Ethiopia a manufacturing hub in Africa—primarily through the expansion of light manufacturing, 
including textile and apparel, leather goods, and processed agricultural products. Specific goals 
include (a) creating 2 million jobs in medium and large businesses by 2025; (b) increasing the 
contribution of manufacturing to overall GDP from the current level of 4 percent to 18–20 percent; 
and (c) ensuring that the manufacturing sector contributes 40 percent of exports by 2025. In this 
regard, the main tools of the Government of Ethiopia (GoE) are targeted manufacturing 
investment, development of industrial parks, provision of quality infrastructure in logistics, and 
skills development. 
5. 
To support fast economic growth, the GoE upgraded economic infrastructure. Under 
GTP I, a series of investment programs in energy, transport (road and rail), and telecommunication 
were undertaken. Significant power generation capacity was constructed, as were complementary 
2 
investments in substations, power transmission, and distribution to carry power to users. Rail 
corridors have been constructed, linking local and regional markets and through regional ports 
connecting Ethiopia to global markets. The road network was increased thereby reducing the 
average time taken to reach the nearest all-weather road to 1.8 hours. Major investment was also 
made in telecommunications to improve service quality, expand service coverage, and enhance 
institutional capacity. Under GTP II, the Government is giving special consideration to 
infrastructure development that helps in attracting investment, creates market opportunities, 
enhances competitiveness, and boosts regional economic integration, namely road, railway, dry 
ports, air transport, energy, telecommunication, water, and irrigation schemes.  
6. 
The Ethiopia-Djibouti corridor is the key conduit for trade. Since the independence of 
Eritrea in 1993, Ethiopia has been a land-locked country; a key factor shaping the external 
environment in which Ethiopia exports and imports. The Ethiopia-Djibouti corridor linking 
Ethiopia to the Port of Djibouti is now the dominant gateway for the country with over 95 percent 
of Ethiopia’s imports and exports using this route. Currently, very small volumes of Ethiopian 
traffic are using the other ports in the region, mainly Port Sudan and Berbera. Recent investments 
in road and rail along the Djibouti corridor have the potential to significantly reduce transport costs 
and time and are a key element encouraging greater interest from investors in opportunities to 
develop manufacturing export capabilities in Ethiopia. With projections that imports and exports 
will more than double under GTP II by 2020 (relative to the base of 2012), the performance of this 
corridor will be of paramount importance. This has been recognized by the Government, which is 
paying special attention to logistics performance and has developed a National Logistics Strategy. 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
7. 
Trade will play a key role in achieving the objectives of GTP II and in driving 
sustained poverty reduction in Ethiopia. Abundant low-cost labor provides Ethiopia with a 
comparative advantage in less-skilled, labor-intensive sectors such as light manufacturing. 
Previous analysis suggests that factory floor costs in Ethiopia in products such as garments, 
footwear, and other leather products and processed food are lower than those in China and India.1 
These competitive advantages are complemented by the tariff preferences that Ethiopia enjoys in 
key markets such as the United States and European Union. However, studies conclude that the 
potential to export such products is constrained by a number of key supply-side factors. This lack 
of competitiveness is reflected in the fact that despite the advantages of low labor costs, the unit 
value of Ethiopia’s exports of light manufacturing products at the point of export is considerably 
higher than those of China and competitor countries elsewhere in the world. For detailed products 
categories such as knitted or crocheted dresses of cotton that are exported by Ethiopia, the unit 
value in 2015 was 47 percent higher than that of China while those of Cambodia and Vietnam 
were 26 percent above those of China (Table 1).2  
 
1 See, for example, Dinh, H., V. Palmade, V. Chandra, and F. Cossar. 2012. Light Manufacturing in Africa. 
Washington DC: World Bank. 
2 When averaged across categories, unit values may also reflect differences in quality as well as prices. The figures 
here are for fairly detailed product categories, which limits this effect, and there is no information to suggest that 
Ethiopia is exporting higher-quality products than competitor countries. 
3 
Table 1. Ratio of Export Unit Value to That of China for Key Manufactured Exports (2015) 
 
Dresses of 
Cotton, 
Knitted or 
Crocheted 
Women’s or 
Girls’ 
Blouses and 
Shirts of 
Other 
Textile 
Materials 
Men’s or 
Boys’ 
Nightshirts 
and Pyjamas 
of Cotton, 
Knitted or 
Crocheted 
T-shirts, 
Singlets, 
and Other 
Vests of 
Cotton, 
Knitted or 
Crocheted 
T-shirts, 
Singlets, and 
Other Vests of 
Other Textile 
Material, 
Knitted or 
Crocheted 
Other 
Footwear 
with Uppers 
of Leather or 
Composition 
Leather 
HS Code 
610442 
610690 
610721 
610910 
610990 
640510 
Ethiopia 
1.47 
1.48 
2.51 
1.67 
2.25 
3.05 
Cambodia 
1.26 
1.34 
2.22 
1.60 
2.33 
2.70 
Mauritius 
1.03 
0.68 
4.24 
1.28 
1.45 
1.63 
Vietnam 
1.26 
1.34 
2.22 
1.60 
2.33 
2.70 
Source: Staff calculations using data from World Integrated Trade Solution. 
Note: Figures show the ratio of each country’s export unit value (FOB) to that of China. The data for Cambodia and 
Vietnam are from 2014.  
8. 
One of the key factors that has been identified as undermining international 
competitiveness is poor trade logistics. A number of recent reports have drawn attention to the 
trade logistics sector in Ethiopia as being a critical constraint to current trade flows and a bottleneck 
to further economic growth and development (Government of Ethiopia 2016; Nathan Associates 
2014; World Bank 2014; African Development Bank, 2015).3 Box 1 summarizes the main 
conclusions of these recent studies of the logistics sector in Ethiopia with regard to the impact on 
trade. Table 2 benchmarks perceptions of Ethiopia’s logistics performance using the Logistics 
Performance Index (LPI). Ethiopia’s logistics sector appears to be considerably behind those of 
competitor countries in Asia as well as certain other land-locked countries in Africa, such as 
Uganda. With regard to actual costs, it has been calculated that for a 20-foot container of garment 
exports to Germany, Ethiopia’s logistics costs are 247 percent higher than those of Vietnam and 
72 percent higher than those of Bangladesh.4 Other factors that have been identified as 
undermining competitiveness include lack of industrial land, limited access to finance, and the 
availability, cost, and quality of inputs. 
Table 2. Benchmarking Logistics -LPI (Index = 1–5, 5 Being High) 
 
2016 
2014 
 
Global Ranking 
LPI  
Global Ranking 
LPI  
Bangladesh 
87 
2.66 
108 
2.56 
Botswana 
57 
3.05 
120 
2.49 
Cambodia 
73 
2.80 
83 
2.74 
China  
27 
3.66 
28 
3.53 
Uganda 
58 
3.04 
n.a. 
n.a. 
Vietnam 
64 
2.98 
48 
3.15 
Ethiopia 
126 
2.38 
104 
2.59 
 
3 Some of the recent diagnostics include the following: Africa Development Bank, Analytical Work on Transport 
Sector in Ethiopia. Growth, Competitiveness and Regional Integration. 2015; Government of Ethiopia. National 
Freight Logistics Strategy for Ethiopia. 2016 and Maritime and Transport Business Solutions. A Strategy and 
Transformation Study for ESLSE. 2014 and Nathan Associates. Development of a National Logistics Strategy for 
Ethiopia. 2013 (5 volumes). 
4 Internal analysis based on data provided by DAMCO, a Logistics arm of the Maersk Group. 
4 
Source: World Bank, LPI 2016 Report. Note: n.a. = Not applicable. 
9. 
The logistics sector in Ethiopia faces three key opportunities: (a) improving the 
efficiency with which trade traffic is processed and adapting to the new intermodal (road-rail) 
transport system; (b) increasing capacity to deal with the projected increase in trade in the next 15 
years (trade flows are expected to more than double under GTP II); and (c) evolving to provide a 
Box 1. The Costs of Inefficiencies in the Logistics Sector in Ethiopia 
The unreliability of trade logistics leads to high overhead costs for manufacturers. Trade logistics have 
become increasingly important in Ethiopia because they are essential to the growth of the light manufacturing 
industry. The 2014 census of medium and large manufacturing firms reveals that more than half the firms 
imported components and raw materials. Further, manufacturing export sectors have come to depend upon the 
ease of importing the required inputs and capital goods, and the time and costs of exporting the manufactured 
products to regional and global markets. It is estimated that between 60 percent and 84 percent of the value of 
Ethiopia’s garment exports is made up of imported raw materials and components. Ethiopian firms face high 
inventory costs (on average 123 days of inventory are needed in the apparel sector) mostly due to the cost and 
unpredictability of importing necessary inputs. Nathan Associates (2014) conclude that “the current supply-chain 
structure contributes to high overhead costs from managing input-material sourcing, in-house production, and 
finished product shipping. Overhead costs in Ethiopia can be twice that in Asia …the fact that the entire supply 
chain is not geared to respond to time constraints makes this industry particularly difficult for Ethiopian 
companies to succeed in” (Nathan Associates 2014-2: 38–39). 
High logistics costs constrain the use of imported inputs and prevent manufacturing firms from operating 
at full capacity. The census of medium and large manufacturing firms for 2015 reveals that 79 percent of firms 
import their inputs because these are not available in the domestic market. Yet, 47 percent of interviewed firms 
identified shortage of inputs as the major problem they faced, with 40 percent responding that this is the main 
reason for not operating throughout the year and 46 percent stating that as the reason for not operating at full 
capacity. High trade logistics costs and the unreliability of the logistics system are likely to be key factors behind 
the challenges that these manufacturing firms face in organizing their inputs.  
Inefficiencies in logistics lead to long journey times, which undermines participation in global value chains. 
For example, for the garment sector, “documentation, transport and clearances take about as much time as 
production. The performance of the logistics system needs to be finely tuned at each step in the supply chain. 
Until it is, speed prevents Ethiopia from entering the medium to high end of the garment market” (Nathan 
Associates 2014- 2: 39). 
The current logistics system in Ethiopia imposes very high costs on small firms participating in trade. 
Currently, the system focuses on processing full container loads and is not geared toward the efficient 
consolidation/distribution of less than full container loads into full container loads, which could then be fed into 
large intermodal facilities for efficient transportation to the port. A notable exception is the logistics system that 
has been developed for the export of cut flowers through air transport. A thriving manufacturing sector, especially 
in processed agricultural products, will require efficient consolidation/distribution services if small firms are to 
benefit from economies of scale in transportation, especially the potential low costs of transport to the global 
market that the railway offers.  
Inefficiencies in logistics undermine agricultural supply chains. Continued productivity improvements in 
agriculture will require enhanced access to modern inputs, seeds, fertilizers, and pesticides, often through 
imports. While the efficiency of the fertilizer supply chain logistics is a key enabler of agricultural transformation 
in Ethiopia, smooth and low-cost import of fertilizer is at present hindered because of the seasonal but acute 
congestion at the Port of Djibouti. The direct cost and the indirect demurrage cost of the delay at anchorage and 
berth are significant and ultimately passed onto the farmers. For instance, the cost paid by a farmer for 100 kg 
fertilizer in 2015 was about US$57 while for the same quantity this year (2016) it is about US$68, an increase 
partly due to the decline in efficiency of trade logistics. Productivity of the agricultural sector and growth of the 
agro-processing sector will be crucial for continuing rural development and will be constrained if the trade 
logistics services available in the country are of poor quality and high cost. (See Annex 8 for a summary of the 
logistics challenges that confront specific sectors in Ethiopia informed by value chain analyses). 
5 
wider range of higher-quality services that are demanded by modern export-oriented sectors. In 
particular, supporting export diversification, especially into manufactured goods, requires not only 
significant improvements in the quality and reliability of logistics services but also an increase in 
the scope of services provided to include modern facilities for warehousing and consolidation 
services, including inventory management and order processing. 
10. 
The trade logistics sector needs to be seen not only in the narrow context of goods 
transport and warehousing but also in the wider role it plays in delivering a competitive 
industrial base. The path to prosperity lies in reducing the costs of trade well beyond tariffs. In 
its effort to accelerate manufacturing growth, the GoE is implementing an ambitious industrial 
park development program under GTP II. The strategy hinges on attracting foreign direct 
investment in export-led and labor-intensive manufacturing sectors, such as garments, electronics, 
and agro-industry. The GoE provides the land and builds the infrastructure for the industrial parks. 
The success of these large-scale investments will therefore depend on the connectivity of these 
industrial sites to different nodes along trade corridors, on the capacity of the GoE and private 
operators to reduce trade logistics costs along the logistics chain, and on the emergence of a 
logistics sector capable of offering the diverse and high-quality services that firms in Ethiopia 
require if they are to integrate successfully into global value chains.  
11. 
The GoE has taken several steps to improve the transport infrastructure. The GoE 
through the Ethiopia Railways Corporation (ERC) recently completed the first phase of an 
extensive railway development program to build a modern railway network extending over 5,000 
km. The priority route, the first one to be built, is a line linking Addis Ababa to the Port of Djibouti, 
stretching some 752 km in total of which 82 km are in Djibouti. The line is dual track between 
Addis Ababa and Adama and is electrified, except for the stretch inside the port area (13 km). The 
railway is designed to have an operational speed of 120 km/hour, which could in theory reduce 
transit time between the port and Addis Ababa to about 6 hours, compared to 3 days by road. The 
Governments of the two countries have issued a request for proposals (RFP) for a management 
contract for the railway—which should ensure it operates at a high level of efficiency.5 The 
investment in the Addis-Djibouti railway infrastructure amounts to almost US$3.4 billion. The 
ERC currently owns a fleet of 32 locomotives and close to 1,100 wagons. About 990 wagons are 
designed for different kinds of cargos while 110 only transport fuel. The success of this large-scale 
investment depends on connectivity to efficient hinterland logistics nodes to which the railway 
essentially serves as a conveyor while the port and dry port act as valves. In addition, the 
operational success of the new railway depends on its ability to develop an intermodal freight 
business as the economics of transportation favor movements through central consolidation 
facilities that generate economies of scale.  
12. 
The new railway line should have a significant economic impact through (a) an ability to 
move large volumes of cargo in and out of the port in one movement (up to 180 twenty-foot 
equivalent units [TEUs] or 3,500 tons of goods per train); (b) potentially reducing transit time to a 
quarter of what it is through road transport; (c) reducing the amounts of demurrage payable to 
shipping lines for containers; and (d) reducing some of the steps needed to clear transit movements 
through the border between Ethiopia and Djibouti. International railway shipments can be fast and 
 
5 Given the abysmal track record of railway concession in Africa that works efficiently, Ethiopia will need to make 
sure that the railway is managed efficiently.  
6 
efficient especially over the distance of the Ethiopia-Djibouti corridor but this requires carefully 
designed operational practices at both ends of the line, simple transit procedures, and efficient 
logistics facilities and services supporting the line. It is expected that the investments in rail 
transportation will provide significant economies of scale, which results in lower transportation 
costs, less accidents, and fewer environmental emissions. 
13. 
The Government has also invested heavily in the road network. Of particular 
importance for this project are the investments that have been and are being made in the road 
corridor to Djibouti via Galafi and the investments that will complete the road corridor to the port 
via Dire Dawa and Dewele. When completed, the latter will cut the distance between the Port of 
Djibouti and Modjo by 130 km. Important investments are also being made that will link industrial 
parks to the main transport corridors within Ethiopia and provide onward connectivity to the Port 
of Djibouti. For instance, the World Bank Group-financed Expressway Development Project (P 
148850) supports the Batu (Zeway)-Arsi Negele section of the Modjo-Hawassa Development 
Corridor. The expressway will provide an important and efficient link between the Hawassa 
Industrial Park—the largest specialized textile and apparel industrial park in Africa—to the Modjo 
Dry Port. 
14. 
However, infrastructure investment on its own, though important, is not enough to 
reduce overall logistics costs in an economy. A significant part of the cost and time savings will 
come from changes to the logistics system that reduce transit time on all modes of transport. The 
Government clearly recognizes this, and as part of the export and industrialization goals, GTP II 
outlines specific targets for the logistics sector. These include (a) cutting the import and export 
transit time by half; (b) reducing the average dwell time of imported goods in the dry ports from 
40 days to 2 days; (c) increasing the rate of local containerization of all containerizable export 
cargo from 7 percent in 2014 to 100 percent in 2025; and (d) reducing the number of documents 
required for export/import from 10 to four.  
15. 
To manage the achievement of these objectives, the Government, through the 
Ethiopian Maritime Affairs Authority (EMAA), has finalized a National Freight Logistics 
Strategy (NFLS) for Ethiopia. The strategy document provides an assessment of Ethiopia’s 
logistics sector, identifies the main logistics impediments, and provides key recommendations to 
transform the sector. The NFLS outlines key strategies along with corresponding interventions for 
implementation in five areas: (a) improving logistics service offerings; (b) improving trade 
finance, production, and the distribution network; (c) improving and developing trade logistics 
facilities and infrastructure; (d) implementing an efficient transit and trade facilitation; and (e) 
setting up effective logistics governance. The GoE has also created a high-level governance 
structure to implement the NFLS in an integrated and coordinated manner. At the highest level, 
the logistics sector is overseen by the Ethiopia National Logistics Transformation Council, which 
is supported by a Logistics Transformation Office housed within the EMAA. 
16. 
While Ethiopia is seeking to reduce its dependence on a single corridor, the immediate 
focus for logistics improvements is the corridor to Djibouti. The corridor now handles more 
than 95 percent of Ethiopia’s trade, and more than 850,000 tons per month. For the port itself, 
traffic originating from, or destined to, Ethiopia accounts for more than 80 percent of all port 
traffic. The key link is to Addis Ababa and the surrounding area where about 90 percent of inbound 
containers are processed at the Modjo Dry Port.  
7 
Figure 1. Ethiopian Exports and Imports and the Dominance of the Ethio-Djibouti Corridor 
(The size of the arrow reflects the share of Ethiopia’s trade along each of the designated corridors.) 
17. 
With significant investment undertaken or planned in the key links along the 
corridor, attention is now focusing on inefficiencies at the key logistics nodes and in the 
regulatory and policy framework. Usually, the logistics industry develops through hubs, which 
are clusters of logistics activities. Efficient hubs are characterized by high service levels and low 
costs. Such hubs are crucial for consolidating/distributing small flows to achieve the critical 
masses necessary to reap the benefits of economies of scale that are crucial for international 
competitiveness. In the logistics system that Ethiopia is developing, the dry ports are the key hubs 
for logistics services activities. As a land-locked country, the other key nodes for Ethiopia are at 
the border and at the Port of Djibouti. 
18. 
The main bottleneck on the logistics supply chain for containerized imports is 
currently the dry port at Modjo. Box 2 summarizes the key issues at the main nodes of the 
logistics supply chain for the Ethio-Djibouti corridor at the Port of Djibouti, the border crossing at 
Galafi, the dry ports, such as at Modjo, and distribution/consolidation centers for agricultural 
products. There are challenges at each of these main nodes, which lead to delays, uncertainties, 
and increased logistics costs. For inbound container traffic, the constraints are most apparent at 
Modjo and are manifest through long delays, significant uncertainties, and unnecessary costs. 
Modjo regularly reaches its terminal capacity very quickly and stays crowded thereafter. For 
multimodal traffic, which currently accounts for more than 85 percent of containerized imports, 
86 percent of the total transport time is spent at Modjo. There are significant operational constraints 
at the Modjo Dry Port including (a) insufficient cargo handling equipment; (b) lack of facilities 
Moyale
Humera
Metema
Gambella
border
Gizen
Kurmuk
Galafi
Dewele
Togowechale
Almahal
Zala Ambesa
Rama
Jijiga
Center 
Customs
Addis Ababa
Airport
2.1%
KENYA
1.3%
SOMALIA
0.1%
5,4%
1,2%
2,5%
5,5%
PORT SUDAN
6.7%
SUDAN
0.1%
SOUTH 
SUDAN
0.15%
PORT OF DJIBOUTI
57%
2%
DJIBOUTI
4%
PORT OF BERBERA
SOMALIA
11,7%
0,1%
5.4%
5.4%
54,3%
2.3%
1.7%
58,3%
1%
)
93.5%
1,5%
0,4%
0,4%
91,6%
0,7%
3,6%
97,3 %
0,2%
1,3%
0,1%
OTHER SOMALI 
PORTS
0,2%
8 
for stuffing of export containers and unstuffing of import containers; (c) lack of proper systems 
for the management of the facility, leading to delays in locating containers and necessitating 
increased moves of boxes—the port is operating without a proper Terminal Operating System and 
gate system; (d) increased congestion around the facility due to poor traffic flow patterns and lack 
of parking spaces for trucks; (e) poor port security as evidenced by the absence of closed- circuit 
television (CCTV); and (f) lack of facilities and readiness to handle inbound and outbound railway 
traffic when commercial operations start in early 2017. Underinvestment in facilities and 
equipment, poor operational procedures and control, and lack of a yard management system are 
responsible for the excess time for truck turnarounds and for 35–40 percent of the container dwell 
time.6 For bulk imports, the key weakness is the lack of storage and handling facilities in Ethiopia. 
19. 
Modjo has been identified by the Government as the key node for the emerging 
Ethiopian intermodal trade logistics system. Most of the medium and large manufacturing firms 
connected to international markets are located in the surrounding areas of Addis Ababa (see map 
10.1 in Annex 10), and the number of these firms has been rising every year. It is envisaged that 
Modjo will play an increasingly important role as the main port in Ethiopia to facilitate the prompt 
evacuation of import traffic from Djibouti (bulk as well as containerized imports), be a hub for the 
consolidation of exports and the stuffing of export containers, and become a facility providing a 
range of modern logistics services to support emerging manufacturing industries. A critical part of 
this will be the provision of logistics services for the intermodal connection between rail and road. 
This follows from the construction of a rail spur into the Modjo facility that is currently being 
completed. Figure 2 shows how Modjo becomes an even more important node in the logistics 
system as the railway becomes a key mode of transport for international trade along the Ethio-
Djibouti corridor. 
Figure 2. The Projected Impact of the Railway Operation on Modjo and the Ethio-Djibouti Corridor 
 
 
6 Nathan Associates. 2014. Development of a National Logistics Strategy for Ethiopia, 2:177. 
9 
Box 2. Inefficiencies at Key Nodes in the Trade Logistics Chain 
(a) Djibouti Port 
Within the Port of Djibouti there are three main areas where Ethiopian trade is handled, at the Doraleh Container 
Terminal, which handles most of the containerized traffic; at the general cargo area, which handles mostly 
breakbulk but also some containerized traffic; and at the bulk terminal, which handles bulk imports mostly of 
fertilizer, grains, and coal. The terminal also handles livestock exports. Many of the problems currently faced are 
with breakbulk and bulk imports. There are large volumes of imports in the port, awaiting removal. The delays in 
removal of traffic are affecting port operations leading to vessels being delayed at the out anchor as they are not 
able to dock. As a result, in effect, vessels are being used as (very high cost) temporary storage facilities. The delays 
in the port contribute to Ethiopia’s high logistics costs for bulk imports, especially grains and fertilizers, and also 
have some direct financial impacts on enterprises such as Ethiopian Shipping and Logistics Service Enterprise 
(ESLSE), Ethiopia Grain Trading Enterprise (EGTE), and Agricultural Inputs Supply Enterprise (AISE) that are 
responsible for most of the demand for vessels. 
The congestion in the bulk terminal is the result of three interrelated factors: 
• 
Lack of coordination leading to overlap in the arrival of ships carrying grain and fertilizer at the Port of 
Djibouti. 
• 
The insufficient unloading capacity of the terminal, which is exacerbated by the bagging of grain and 
fertilizer directly from the ship for loading onto trucks. 
• 
The practice of direct delivery, which means that the speed of unloading is limited by the availability of 
trucks, which is governed by the cycle time to deliver to warehouses in Ethiopia. In practice, a shortage 
of trucks is a key constraint.  
A new bulk terminal is due to open in the Port of Djibouti in 2017. This will help address some of the factors behind 
current delays in the port for bulk imports—but not all. The new terminal will have greater depth and more storage, 
but issues such as the scheduling of bulk deliveries and the size, quality, and organization of the truck fleet and 
storage facilities in Ethiopia, which are all factors that can be influenced by policy in Ethiopia, will continue to 
limit efficient unloading. 
To resolve this problem requires greater coordination and the restructuring of the logistics chain. For example, ship 
turnaround time, handling costs, and transport costs (especially with the railway) will be reduced by delaying 
bagging until final delivery. This requires significant investments in bulk storage and handling at key locations in 
Ethiopia. 
(b) The Border Crossings at Galafi and Dewele 
The Galafi border post is the main crossing point on the corridor to Djibouti. The Ethiopian and Djiboutian border 
management agencies have separate offices and facilities. For imported goods, crossing over from Djibouti to 
Ethiopia entails exit bor

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

ner freight stations (CFSs) for receiving both inbound and more importantly outbound 
container shipments. Modjo is, for all intents and purposes, an inbound container handling facility only. There are 
no unimodal activities taking place at Modjo of either import or export traffic. This is because unimodal imports 
are processed and released in Comet Dry Port or at the customers’ premises, while unimodal exports are loaded 
onto trucks at the customer’s warehouse or plant and transported as breakbulk in transit to the Port of Djibouti for 
container stuffing, border clearance, and loading onto vessels for export. A large proportion of Ethiopia’s 
containerized exports are stuffed in Djibouti, contributing to empty running and inefficiencies in the system.  
 
20. 
The move to a modern logistics sector centered on Modjo also requires addressing 
constraints arising from the current regulatory framework. Box 3 provides a brief overview 
of the key players in the logistics sector and discusses the regulatory and policy issues that govern 
the provision of logistics services along the corridor. The limits on competition and the 
burdensome regulatory process raise costs and limit the entry of suppliers of modern logistics 
services. Of particular importance is the regulatory framework that will govern the operation of 
the Modjo logistics facility. The key challenge is to facilitate the transformation of the dry port 
that is focused on customs clearance of containers to a multipurpose multiservice logistics hub that 
services bulk as well as containerized traffic, provides efficient intermodal connectivity, and 
provides a wide range of logistics services including warehousing, consolidation of export 
volumes, deconsolidation of imports, the stuffing and unstuffing of containers, packaging, and so 
on. This will require the participation of a variety of logistics providers beyond ESLSE. In this 
way, Modjo is seen as a national facility whose development is to be overseen by the EMAA. 
11 
Box 3. The Key Players and the Regulatory Framework for Logistics in Ethiopia 
(a) The Unimodal and Multimodal Systems 
There are two forms of transport along the Ethio-Djibouti corridor, namely unimodal transport and multimodal 
transport (MMT). The terminologies are used in the context of contract of carriage expressed through the bill of 
lading and not the methods of transport. Therefore ‘multimodal’ refers to the shipment carried under an MMT bill 
of lading issued by an accredited Multimodal Transport Operator, often the shipping line, which assumes the 
liability for the shipment. In contrast, ‘unimodal’ refers to the shipment carried under separate contracts of carriage 
performed by different carriers on different segments of the transport journey. This entails segmented bills of 
lading, one for ocean carriage and another for land transport. Liability for the cargo is transferred from one carrier 
to the next after each segment of the journey is completed. In practice, the multimodal system is used solely for the 
import of containerized cargo and cars and requires shipments to be cleared at the dry ports in Ethiopia. To a large 
extent, the use of the multimodal system has contributed to faster removal of goods from the Port of Djibouti, 
alleviating congestion in the container terminal. Before the introduction of the MMT bill of lading the average 
dwell time of a container at Djibouti was more than 45 days. The MMT bill of lading makes it possible to pass 
through Djibouti under customs seal and transit without the need for customs clearance. The unimodal system is 
used for other imports, mainly bulk and breakbulk, and the export of all types of cargo. Imported goods are cleared 
by customs in Djibouti. Most importers of containers use the multimodal system because this offers the advantages 
of lower storage charges and deferment of payment of duties. 
(b) Logistics Services Providers 
Logistics services in Ethiopia are dominated by ESLSE, a government-owned enterprise. ESLSE provides shipping 
services, arranges the transfer of goods between Djibouti and Ethiopia, and operates the dry port at Modjo. Current 
government policy means that ESLSE is the only provider of multimodal services. Truck operations are provided 
largely by the private sector, and ESLSE contracts trucking services between the port and Modjo.  
There are close to 7,000 trucks operating on the corridor to Djibouti. Ownership of the trucking fleet is in the hands 
of (a) operators of individual trucks, (b) road transport companies, and (c) associations of individual truck owners. 
The truck companies and associations vary widely in size, and there is a preponderance of owners of individual 
trucks (as much as 90 percent). According to the EMAA report, 44 percent of the actual fleet on the road is less 
than or equal to 10 years old, while 24 percent is between 10 and 20 years old and 32 percent is more than 20 years 
old. This means that 56 percent of the fleet is more than 10 years old and that the average truck on the road is prone 
to breakdowns and costly repairs with high downtime. Also, the compatibly of truck equipment to cargo load is 
also an issue. There is a preponderance of general cargo vehicles equipped with flat-bed trailers with side walls and 
no locking pins (the containers are strapped to trailers by wires), which slows loading and unloading and adds 
weight to the vehicle, which translates into greater fuel consumption. At the same time, the number of Ethiopian 
trucks designed for hauling containers continues to be limited. The inertia in replacing the trucking fleet reflects a 
number of factors, including the low utilization of equipment, high import duties on trucks with an effective rate 
as much as 270 percent, and the limited use of long-term contracts. The shortage of modern trucks appears to be 
encouraging new industries and investors to invest in their own in-house trucking capability, even though trucking 
is not their core business. While this mitigates the constraints they face of not being able to procure a reliable and 
quality trucking service from the market, their fleet is only available for self-use. This entails a less efficient solution 
than firms procuring transportation services from dedicated and sophisticated trucking firms. 
(c) Regulatory and Policy Issues 
Ethiopia’s trade logistics supply chain is affected by a number of policies, regulations, and administrative hurdles 
that considerably undermine efficiency and competitiveness. Firms experience numerous challenges at various 
stages of the import/export process: 
• 
Documentation and approval processes are complicated. Importers and exporters in Ethiopia are required 
to submit numerous documents to multiple agencies as part of the import/export clearance processes. 
Traders spend a considerable amount of time obtaining these mandatory documents issued by the different 
government agencies and banks. The manual and lengthy nature of these procedures at these agencies and 
the lack of coordination among them (no data sharing) require the trader to submit several copies of the 
same documents to several agencies. Part of the reason for a cumbersome documentation process is a 
complicated approval system in Ethiopia. The Government has begun an effort to streamline, simplify, 
and automate this process by introducing an electronic single-window system to cover all regulatory 
procedures related to trade clearance.  
12 
• 
Foreign exchange and related regulations require a permit for all imports, and the limits on methods of 
payment for most transactions (letters of credit and cash against document) have impacts on the logistics 
system. 
• 
There are restrictions on competition such that the provision of services in the road transport sector, 
packaging, warehousing, freight forwarding, and other logistics are areas of investment exclusively 
reserved for Ethiopian nationals. This together with the monopoly on multimodal shipments for ESLSE 
has proved to be an impediment for provision of efficient logistics services and establishment of logistic 
hubs that meet international standards. 
21. 
Coordination failures undermine the efficiency of the trade logistics chain. The main 
challenges are (a) continued reliance on paper documents, fax, and emails in the exchange of 
official information between government agencies and the private sector, which is slow, 
unpredictable, and prone to errors and omissions; (b) lack of real-time cargo tracking along the 
logistics supply chain; (c) inefficient in-house business processing of information, which delays 
decision making and release of information/decisions; and (d) the lack of modern port management 
systems in the dry ports, including Modjo. Information and communication technology (ICT) 
solutions to these problems, which are widely used and seen as the backbone of logistics in other 
countries, have yet to be broadly implemented. There has been some progress in customs 
automation and modernization, including the upgrading of Automated Systems for Customs Data 
(ASYCUDA), and a government directive requiring the installation of global positioning system 
in the trucking fleet. However, there is no integrated approach to ICT in logistics across 
stakeholders. 
C. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes 
22. 
The proposed project will support the GoE in implementing its GTP II, which has the 
goal of transforming the economy into a middle-income country by 2025. Under GTP II, the GoE 
plans to make significant progress toward structural transformation where manufacturing is 
expected to play a prominent role in the economy with regard to job creation, technology learning, 
and a structural shift in Ethiopia’s export position.  
23. 
The project is consistent with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy 
(FY13–FY16) (Report number 71884), which seeks to support the GoE in achieving 
structural transformation and assisting in the implementation of the GTP. The Country 
Partnership Strategy includes two pillars with governance as the foundation and two cross-cutting 
themes. Pillar One, ‘Fostering competitiveness and employment,’ aims to support Ethiopia in 
achieving the following strategic objectives: (a) support structural and macroeconomic policies; 
(b) increase agricultural productivity and marketing; (c) increased competitiveness in 
manufacturing and services, and MSE access to financial services; (d) increase access to and 
quality infrastructure; and (e) improve regional integration. This project will contribute directly to 
the objective of increasing competitiveness and productivity and will indirectly contribute to 
enhanced regional integration.  
24. 
A key objective of the draft Country Partnership Framework (FY17–FY21) is 
fostering structural transformation by enhancing transport and logistics efficiency. The 
project is at the center of the challenges facing Ethiopia that were discussed in the recently finalized 
Systematic Country Diagnostic. Addressing the trade logistics challenge is identified as a critical 
element in delivering faster and more inclusive structural change. 
13 
25. 
The project supports the World Bank’s twin goals of reducing extreme poverty and 
enhancing shared prosperity. Improving dry bulk transport and logistics for fertilizers and grains 
will translate into significant poverty reduction through an increase in smallholder farmers’ 
agricultural productivity and a reduction in food insecurity. Moreover, the Government’s goal of 
structural change and industrialization through increased investment, especially foreign direct 
investment, will only be achieved if logistics costs are reduced.

A. PDO 
26. 
The objective of this project is to enhance the performance of the Ethio-Djibouti 
corridor through improvements in operational capacity, efficiency, and range of logistics 
services at the Modjo Dry Port. 
27. 
The project will achieve this through investments in physical infrastructure, ICT systems, 
and support for regulatory improvements to increase exports, raise incomes of producers and 
traders, and generate jobs. For the purpose of this project, the “Ethio-Djibouti Corridor” means 
connection between Modjo in central Ethiopia and the Ethiopia-Djibouti border. In addition, the 
performance of the Corridor is impacted by the efficiency of the railway and road transport, the 
operational efficiency of regulatory agencies such as Customs Agencies and the operations of the 
Port of Djibouti. The project does not envisage any intervention in these areas and in the Port of 
Djibouti. The scope of the project is only limited in addressing efficiencies in Modjo Dry Port. 
Project Beneficiaries 
28. 
Project beneficiaries will primarily be private sector exporters, importers, manufacturers 
and farmers, those working for companies producing goods for export, government agencies 
involved in exporting and importing, and consumers. The main benefits for these groups are 
summarized in Table 3: 
Table 3. Project Beneficiaries 
Beneficiary 
Impacts of Project 
Benefits 
Farmers 
Increase in efficiency and range of 
logistics services including consolidation 
and access to intermodal transfer 
 
Improve capacity for bulk transport (by 
rail) and storage of fertilizers 
Exporters of crops such as coffee, 
vegetables, and sesame will benefit from 
lower trade costs and greater reliability of 
the logistics system. 
 
Farmers will benefit from better and more 
reliable access to lower-cost fertilizers 
with positive impacts on yields. 
 
Increase in returns for farmers 
14 
Beneficiary 
Impacts of Project 
Benefits 
Small- and medium-
scale enterprises in the 
manufacturing sector 
Increase capacity and efficiency of 
logistics, stuffing and unstuffing 
services, and access to rail transport 
through intermodal transfer  
Reduction costs and improved reliability 
of exports and imported intermediate 
inputs  
 
Lower inventory costs 
 
Increased ability to operate at higher 
capacity utilization 
Logistics service 
providers  
Increase in capacity and improved 
management of logistics hub 
 
Investment in infrastructure for wider 
range of modern logistics services  
Reduction in operating costs from greater 
efficiency in use of trucks and manpower 
as truck turnaround times are reduced 
 
Opportunity to increase range of services 
provided 
Government agencies  
Increase in efficiency and range of 
logistics services including intermodal 
transfer 
 
Improve capacity for bulk transport (by 
rail) and storage of fertilizers 
Lower costs of imported fertilizers and 
grains 
 
Foreign currency savings from lower 
demurrage costs in Djibouti and stuffing in 
Ethiopia  
Consumers and workers 
Increase in capacity and range of 
logistics services provided at the 
logistics hub 
 
Improve management of logistics 
facility 
New and better jobs created for local 
residents 
 
Higher incomes for residents 
 
Less congestion in and around facility and 
improved safety from better handling of 
hazardous materials and during the 
movement of containers inside the dry port 
PDO Level Results Indicators 
29. 
The project development objective (PDO) level indicators will be:  
(a) Throughput of the Modjo Dry Port (total tons per year) - capacity, 
(b) Container dwell time in Modjo Dry Port (days) - efficiency, 
(c) Moves within Modjo facility (number per hour) - efficiency, 
(d) Containers returning to Djibouti stuffed with exports (number per year) - range of 
logistics services

A. Project Components 
30. 
The project comprises a mix of public infrastructure at the Modjo Dry Port, 
coordinated with targeted investment in ICT and regulatory and administrative reforms that 
improve the efficiency and coordination of logistics facilities and services. The project will 
also support institutional capacity building to ensure effective implementation and sustainability. 
15 
Component 1: Improvement of infrastructure at Modjo (US$120 million equivalent) 
31. 
The investments in infrastructure at Modjo will support the facility to achieve three 
key objectives: (a) to improve the efficiency of processing of current traffic flows through the dry 
port; (b) to increase the capacity of Modjo to process the projected increasing volumes of trade, 
including the interconnectivity between rail and road transportation; and (c) to facilitate the 
transformation of Modjo to become a logistics hub offering a wide range of logistics services to 
exports as well as imports and to support diversification into a wider range of higher value-added 
exported products.  
32. 
The project will support the transformation of Modjo into a logistics hub that will 
meet the increasing demand for specialized and value-added logistics services. These 
investments are essential to support the growth of the export sector through the provision of a 
range of value-adding logistics services that are increasingly required to integrate into the global 
value chains. Of particular importance will be the development of services to support Ethiopia’s 
key exports in coffee, fruit, and vegetable, textile and clothing, leather and footwear, and the food 
manufacturing sector (Annex 8 provides a more detailed discussion based on a summary of value 
chain analyses). As noted, these sectors are dependent on the efficient processing of imported 
inputs as well as access to quick, reliable, and low-cost logistics services for exports. Combining 
intermodal transfer facilities with other logistics services such as those provided by CFS 
infrastructure will expand the functionality of Modjo and strengthen the business case for 
investment to transform the facility into a logistics hub. These investments will also facilitate the 
participation of smaller firms in exporting by providing efficient logistics services, including 
stuffing, unstuffing, and storage for part container loads, which cannot be undertaken at the 
producers’ own premises. In particular, the project will support investments in a CFS, a bulk 
shipment facility for bulk imports and consolidation center for bulk exports, bonded warehouses, 
a container storage facility for exporters, and core facilities to allow for investment in other value-
added logistics activities such as packaging and labelling. Investments in value-added services will 
be informed by a value chain analysis and main cargo flow analysis to determine the logistics hub 
functionalities and the need and appropriate role for government-provided infrastructure. Modjo 
and the facilities to be procured using the IDA finance will be procured by EMAA and designated 
for use as public infrastructure and multi-user facility as envisaged by the National Logistics 
Strategy to be operated by the ESLSE and other logistics service providers. 
33. 
The proposed project will finance the expansion and upgrading of the Modjo Dry 
Port through investment in the following facilities: 
(a) 
An intermodal transfer facility (US$27 million equivalent). The project will finance 
investments to allow the efficient processing of freight to/from the rail link to Djibouti 
from/to destinations/origins within Ethiopia served by road transportation, including 
construction of a cross-docking facility and a rail-mounted gantry crane to allow for 
efficient cargo movement from rail to trucks and truck to rail. These investments will be 
essential to ensure the seamless processing of import and export goods and to ensure that 
the competitive advantages from low-cost rail transportation are not undermined by high 
costs and delays in the dry port. 
(b) 
A bulk storage and bagging facility (US$25 million equivalent). Project activities will 
include investments in bulk storage and bagging of bulk products (especially fertilizers and