[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 54671 chars (22.0% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
1. 
Ethiopia is Africa’s second most populous country with a population of more than 115 million. 
Population growth has slowed in recent years but still stands at a high 2.6 percent per year. Most of the 
population lives in rural areas, and the share of the urban population (21 percent) is among the lowest in 
the world, well below the average for Sub-Saharan Africa (41 percent).1  
2. 
Ethiopia’s economy experienced strong, broad-based growth averaging 9.4 percent a year from 
2010 to 2019. Ethiopia has made an incredible run on the back of large infrastructure investment financed 
through a heterodox mix of policies including an overvalued exchange rate2. The Coronavirus disease 
(COVID-19) pandemic has slowed growth to 6.1 percent in 2020, and there are signs that school closures 
and other containment measures, which disproportionately affected the poor, will widen inequality gaps.3 
3. 
Chronic food insecurity, in combination with climate-related disasters (flood and drought) and 
the Tigray conflict, is exacerbating humanitarian needs and undermining Ethiopia’s gains in growth and 
poverty reduction. Ethiopia has been suffering from chronic food shortage. About 8.5 million people 
currently face high levels of food insecurity, driven by economic decline, COVID-19 measures, desert 
locust, as well as disaster and conflict-related displacement.4 The COVID-19 pandemic has had limited 
health impacts compared to other regions.5 However, the measures put in place to contain its spread have 
had negative impacts on food security, and severe social and economic consequences. This is especially 
true in urban areas, where household incomes declined most, primarily due to reduced demand, which 
affected income generation from self-employment, wage-employment, and household enterprises.6 The 
2020 desert locust outbreak destroyed crops and pastures in rain-fed areas of the Amhara, Tigray, Afar, 
Somali, and Oromia regions, further reducing food availability and impacting the food security and 
livelihoods of the affected population. Ethiopia’s Tigray conflict has escalated and expanded beyond the 
original conflict area culminating in a six-month national state of emergency, declared on November 2, 
2021. Although the conflict has meanwhile subsided, the state of emergency has been lifted (on February 
15, 2022) and a ceasefire between the Ethiopian Government and the Tigray People’s Liberation Front 
(TPLF) was signed November 2, 2022. The two-year conflict has led to a dramatic increase in humanitarian 
needs and exacerbated hunger and malnutrition, threatening to undermine the economic and social 
development outcomes achieved in Ethiopia. According to the latest  analysis by the World Food Program 
(WFP), over 13 million people are now food insecure and in need of support across Northern Ethiopia - 
 
1 United Nations Population Division. World Urbanization Prospects: 2018 Revision. 
2 Given the restrictions on the foreign exchange market, a “parallel” market for foreign exchange has emerged where foreign 
currencies trade at a premium. The Ethiopian authorities have acknowledged the need for a more flexible and market-determined 
exchange rate regime.  Between 2019 and 2022, the Birr was devalued by a cumulative 80 percent in nominal terms as part of a 
plan to gradually align the exchange rate with fundamentals. Despite this adjustment, the real exchange rate remains heavily 
overvalued as high inflation and the onset of the war in Ukraine brought the gradual adjustments to a halt for fears of stoking 
further inflation. 
3 Tiruneh, 2020. COVID-19 school closures may further widen the inequality gaps between the advantaged and the disadvantaged 
in Ethiopia. Education in Emergencies, April. 
4 IPC, 2020. IPC Acute Food Insecurity Analysis October 2020 – September 2021, Issued December 2020. 
5 As of November 7, 2022, the country reported 7,572 coronavirus-related deaths (WHO, 2022. Health Emergency Dashboard 
(COVID-19).  
6 UN, 2020. The Socio-Economic Impact of COVID-19 in Ethiopia.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Flood Management Project (P176327) 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 82  
  
 
5.4 million in the Tigray Region, 1.2 million in the Afar Region and over 7 million in the Amhara Region..7 
The conflict has also impacted supply chains, transport networks, and economic activities including 
foreign direct investments, and continues to pose a risk to the economic growth and development 
prospects of Ethiopia.8 
4. 
Ethiopia is highly prone and vulnerable to floods, droughts and other climate-related disasters. 
Droughts are a prevalent hazard in Ethiopia, which on average affect 1.5 million people annually.9 In 
addition, over the past 10-20 years, flood events have become more widespread and destructive, resulting 
in heightened attention to this disaster type from national policy makers, as well as from development 
partners and donors.  
5. 
The proposed Flood Management Project (FMP) will fill the critical gaps related to Disaster Risk 
Management (DRM) and flood risk management, which has so far received limited attention despite 
floods having long been recognized for many years as one of the main disasters affecting the lives and 
livelihoods of the poor and vulnerable in Ethiopia. The FMP supports a more-people centric approach. 
The project seeks to address Ethiopia’s underlying DRM challenges and vulnerability to climate shocks by 
addressing urgent flood protection needs in select high flood risk areas with vulnerable communities and 
by building the foundations to improve the DRM system for the longer-term disaster and climate resilience 
of the country.  
6. 
The project follows a request from the Ministry of Finance (MoF),10 issued in response to the 
2020 rainy season flood events, for the World Bank’s technical and financial assistance, including 
investments in flood protective measures in disaster-prone areas. The proposed grant in the amount of 
US$300 million equivalent will help strengthen Ethiopia’s institutional capacity for disaster risk 
management (DRM), and flood risk management in selected basins.  For domestic expenditures on the 
project, implementing entities will be provided Ethiopian Birrs using the official exchange rate (as of the 
date of the transactions). Where domestic prices have already increased to reflect the current 
overvaluation of the Ethiopian Birr, the Government has agreed to make up in part for the shortfall in Birr 
by increasing its counterpart fund contribution to 50%.  This means for every dollar disbursed for domestic 
expenditures by IDA, the Government would contribute 50 cents in Birr equivalent where warranted until 
the distortion in the exchange rate is addressed.   
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
Disasters, Climate Risk and Fragility 
7. 
Although a recurrent seasonal phenomenon, floods in recent years significantly increased in 
magnitude, frequency and intensity,11 driven by climate change, rapid population and urban growth, as 
well as environmental degradation. Modelled impacts show that floods annually affect about 250,000 
 
7 WFP, 2022. Northern Ethiopia Emergency Response Situation Report #08, as per October 21, 2022. 
8 Bozzoli, Carlos, Brück, and Sottsas. 2010. A survey of the global economic costs of conflict. Defense and Peace Economics 21(2), 
pp. 165-176. Mimeo. 
9 World Bank/GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery). 2019. Ethiopia Disaster Risk Profile. 
10 The request letter, with the subject header “Support towards the recent Flooding Events in Ethiopia”, was submitted by the 
State Minister to the World Bank on October 6, 2020. 
11 EM-DAT, 2021. The International Database. Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Flood Management Project (P176327) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 82  
  
 
people, and annual damage is estimated at about US$200 million to buildings and US$3.5 million to 
cropland. 12 Recent events, notably the floods in 2020 which particularly affected the Afar, Oromia, 
Gambella, Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples’ Region, Somali, and Amhara regions,13,14 made 
evident the high exposure and vulnerability, and the disastrous economic and human impacts of flooding 
in Ethiopia. According to the Ethiopia Disaster Risk Management Commission (EDRMC), the 2020 floods 
were one the most severe in decades, with 288 fatalities, over one million people affected and an 
estimated 292,000 people displaced.15 A rapid geodata informed assessment by the World Bank found 
that the floods impacted an estimated 38,600 buildings, 1,350 km of the road network, and 164,000 ha of 
cropland. Direct flood damage to just these assets was estimated at US$358 million.16 
8. 
There is immediate need to enhance Ethiopia’s resilience to climate-related shocks, which 
disproportionately affect poor and vulnerable populations, compound Ethiopia’s development 
challenges, and undermine progress in poverty reduction. Ethiopia has achieved remarkable progress in 
poverty alleviation, but studies show that economic growth and development progress are strongly 
associated with the hydrological variability in the country. During the 1984–1985 drought, for example, 
gross domestic product (GDP) declined by 9.7 percent, agriculture output by 21 percent, and gross 
domestic savings by 58.6 percent,17 and it took a decade for affected Ethiopians to return to their pre-
disaster wealth, and asset-poor households to restore livestock holdings to pre-famine levels.18 In 2015-
2016, Ethiopia experienced a severe drought that required the delivery of US$1.7 billion in food assistance 
to nearly 17 million people.19  Overall, it is estimated that drought alone costs the country US$1.1 billion 
per year.20 In terms of flooding, the economic and poverty implications have not been studied in detail for 
Ethiopia. However, global analyses show that, in absolute terms, Ethiopia is among the top ten countries 
worldwide with an estimated 2.8 million poor people (at US$1.90/day) exposed to 1-in-100 year flooding 
events.21 Moreover, case studies from flood-prone areas in Ethiopia’s northwest show that the poor are 
disproportionately flood vulnerable, given that their savings are predominantly in immobile assets 
(housing), and their livelihoods (agriculture, livestock) are more susceptible to flooding.22 The 2020 floods 
also highlighted the vulnerability of poor populations. In Afar, one of the most heavily affected regions 
(accounting for over 43 percent of the total displaced), rapid needs assessments show that the floods 
killed more than 16,000 heads of livestock, and aggravated the already serious humanitarian situation. 
 
12 World Bank/GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery). 2019. Ethiopia Disaster Risk Profile. 
13 Joint Government-Humanitarian Response Plan, Ethiopia – 2020 Kiremt Season Floods. 
14 Kassegn et el., 2021. Review on socio-economic impacts of ‘Triple Threats’ of COVID-19, desert locusts, and floods in East Africa: 
Evidence from Ethiopia. 
15 OCHA, 2021. Ethiopia: Floods - Flash Update No. 3, as of 8 September 2020. 
16 Flood damages were estimated using maximum damage figures for Ethiopia by the European Joint Research Centre (JRC): 
Huizinga, J., De Moel, H. and Szewczyk, W., 2017. Global flood depth-damage functions: Methodology and the database with 
guidelines (No. JRC105688). Joint Research Centre (Seville site). 
17 World Bank, 2006. Ethiopia: Managing Water Resources to Maximize Sustainable Growth. 
18 Dercon, 2004. Growth and Shocks: Evidence from Rural Ethiopia. 
19 USAID, 2018. Economics of Resilience to Drought. Ethiopia Analysis.  
20 Oxfam, 2011. Briefing on the Horn of Africa Drought 2011: Disaster Risk Reduction – Fundamental to Saving Lives and 
Reducing Poverty. 
21 Rentschler and Salhab, 2020. People in Harm’s Way. Flood Exposure and Poverty in 189 Countries. 
22 Weldegebriel and Amphune, 2017. Livelihood resilience in the face of recurring floods: an empirical evidence from Northwest 
Ethiopia.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Flood Management Project (P176327) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 82  
  
 
The main priorities for emergency relief included shelter and non-food items, water, sanitation and 
hygiene (WASH) as well as essential health services to meet the basic needs of the affected population.23  
9. 
Floods and other climate-related shocks exacerbate fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV) 
dynamics in Ethiopia, and have the potential to trigger conflict and violence in instable areas. Ethiopia 
is characterized by strong intersectional risks with high levels of fragility, disaster risk, poverty, and climate 
change vulnerability. 24 , 25 In addition to conflict-induced displacement, climate-related disasters are 
increasingly compounding the country’s displacement and humanitarian challenges. Droughts have been 
a persistent driver of displacement in Ethiopia’s arid regions, and in recent years climate variability and 
heavy precipitation have also brought to the fore flood-induced displacement. In 2019, Ethiopia recorded 
over 1.5 million new displacements (the second-highest number in Sub-Saharan Africa), of which 504,000 
were triggered by disasters, mostly related to floods and heavy rain.26 The 2020 floods, estimated to have 
displaced over 290,000 people,27 highlight the displacement impacts of seasonal floods. The displacement 
of people (and livestock) due to floods and droughts is seen to increase competition over land and grazing 
grounds between agricultural and pastoralist communities, fueling communal tension and conflict. 28 
Models suggest that Ethiopia faces a significant increase in disaster displacement in the future and it is 
estimated that over 117,000 people may be displaced annually due to floods alone.29 FCV dynamics in 
Ethiopia are driven by a legacy of conflict in the wider HoA region, the increasing competition over land 
and resources (notably water),in particular in areas where pastoralism and shifting cultivation are the 
dominant forms of production, acute food insecurity, and diminished capacities to respond to climate and 
environmental risks. Climate-related shocks such as floods and droughts are moreover found to 
exacerbate the FCV dynamics by their compounding impacts on food crises, displacement, or 
land/resource-based conflicts.30 
10. 
Climate change is increasing water stress, while rainfall patterns are becoming more erratic, 
and projections indicate a growing magnitude of floods and other climate-related disasters. Ethiopia 
has three seasons: June–September (kiremt), October–January (bega), and February–May (belg). Kiremt 
rains account for 50–80 percent of the annual rainfall totals, and most droughts result from failure of the 
kiremt. 31 Lowlands are vulnerable to rising temperatures and prolonged droughts, while highlands are 
prone to intense and irregular rainfall. Climate trends show an increase in temperature and growing 
rainfall variability, while extreme weather events with intense precipitation have become more common. 
In line with general warming trends, climate projections indicate a higher likelihood of heat waves and 
intense precipitation events, which are expected to result in a higher frequency and intensity of riverine 
and flash floods, as well as rain-induced landslides.32,33 
 
23 UNOCHA, 2020. Afar Region: Flood Snapshot, as of 15 August 2020. 
24 ODI, 2013. When disasters and conflicts collide. Improving links between disaster resilience and conflict prevention. 
25 World Bank/UNHCR, 2015. Forced Displacement and Mixed Migration in the Horn of Africa.  
26 IDMC, 2020. Global Report on Internal Displacement. 
27 Joint Government-Humanitarian Response Plan, Ethiopia – 2020 Kiremt Season Floods.  
28 IOM, 2020. Ethiopia National Displacement Report 6, Round 23: August - September 2020. 
29 IDMC, 2020. Country Information Ethiopia. 
30 Climate Security Expert Network, 2019. Climate-Fragility Risk Brief – Ethiopia.  
31 USAID, 2016. Climate Change Risk Profile Ethiopia. 
32 CDKN/IPCC, 2014. The IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report: What's in it for Africa? 
33 IPCC, 2012. Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Flood Management Project (P176327) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 82  
  
 
11. 
Hydro-meteorological risks are unevenly distributed across regions and river basins, owing to 
the country’s large topographic and climatic variability. Five topographic areas can generally be 
distinguished in the country: the Western Highlands; the Western Lowlands; the Eastern Highlands; the 
Eastern Lowlands; and the Rift Valley. The highlands occupy approximately 35 percent and the lowlands 
65 percent of the total land area. 34 The highlands are temperate, with high annual rainfall, or tropical 
savannah with distinct dry and wet seasons. In the lowland areas in the east, the climate is arid steppe or 
arid desert, and is significantly hotter and drier. Ethiopia has twelve major river basins, of which three are 
considered dry (the Ogaden, Aysaha, and Danakil). The northern and central highlands drain westward 
into Ethiopia's most extensive river system: the Abbay (or the Blue Nile) into the Tekeze River (a tributary 
of the main Nile), and the Baro River (a branch of the White Nile). The Awash River, flowing to the 
northeast, never reaches the sea but is ultimately absorbed into a succession of lakes and marshes near 
the Djibouti border. The Wabi-Shebele and Genale-Dawa rivers drain across the eastern lowlands, 
moderating the arid desert ecology along their riverbanks. In the south, the Omo River drains into Lake 
Turkana, and several streams flow into the Rift Valley lakes.35 Apart from the larger rivers, there are few 
perennial streams below 1,000 meters. The Awash River is the most intensively developed river basin in 
Ethiopia, with a high concentration of economic value and assets, including most of the irrigated 
agriculture and related industries, such as sugar cane production.36  
12. 
Non-climatic hazards, such as earthquakes, landslides, and urban fire, are also becoming 
increasingly prevalent in the context of rapid population and urban growth, and pose a further 
immediate challenge for disaster risk management (DRM) in Ethiopia. Earthquakes pose a less frequent 
but potentially high-impact hazard to Ethiopia. Several major cities and towns, including the capital city 
Addis Ababa, are situated in Rift Valley areas with a moderate earthquake hazard. As most known 
earthquakes in Ethiopia have been shallow (<25km deep), they can cause significant damage to buildings 
and infrastructure even with moderate magnitudes, especially if they occur beneath or close to major 
urban areas.37 Urban growth, in particular of informal settlements, is also a significant driver of risk related 
to landslides, which pose a more localized but also significant hazard across Ethiopia, in particular, in the 
highlands. Landslides in Ethiopia are primarily triggered by heavy rainfall, but they can also be caused by 
earthquake ground shaking. Human-induced landslides are becoming more common as agriculture, road 
cutting, urbanization, and deforestation destabilize slopes.38 Finally, urban fire presents an increasing risk 
in Ethiopia’s growing cities. Rapid settlement growth, densification of urban area, and in particular, the 
significant development of high-rise buildings is increasing the vulnerability of Ethiopia’s cities to urban 
fires. While data on urban fires is scarce, there are indications that their magnitude has increased over 
the past years. 
DRM Institutional Context and Challenges 
13. 
The institutional set up for DRM in Ethiopia has been subject to multiple reforms. The EDRMC 
is the formal focal government institution responsible for coordinating disaster response, risk 
management, preventive measures, and recovery programs. It also assumes responsibilities in the 
coordination of humanitarian relief and provision of support to conflict- and disaster-displaced people. 
 
34 World Bank, 2020. Challenges and Opportunities for Water in Development in the Lowlands of Ethiopia.  
35 See Figure 2-1 in Annex 2. 
36 World Bank, 2020. Challenges and Opportunities for Water in Development in the Lowlands of Ethiopia.  
37 World Bank/GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery). 2019. Ethiopia Disaster Risk Profile. 
38 Ibid. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Flood Management Project (P176327) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 82  
  
 
The institutional arrangements for DRM underwent multiple changes in the past fifty years, reflecting the 
evolving strategic priorities and mandates in Ethiopia and the wider policy shift from drought and 
emergency relief toward a proactive, multisectoral, and multihazard approach in disaster management. 
The National Disaster Risk Management Commission (NDRMC), formally established in 2016, emerged 
from predecessor institutions, notably the Relief and Rehabilitation Commission (1973–1995), the 
Disaster Prevention and Preparedness Commission/Agency (1995–2007), and the Disaster Risk 
Management and Food Security Sector (2007–2016). Until October 2021, the NDRMC was structured 
under the Ministry of Peace as a part of efforts to streamline disaster- and security-related agendas in 
Ethiopia. In October 2021, following the formation of a new government and subsequent restructuring, 
the NDRMC has been independently incorporated as the EDRMC reporting to the Prime Minister’s Office.  
14. 
During the past ten years, policy and strategic frameworks for DRM have been put in place, 
however, significant gaps persist in their programming and delivery. A National Policy and Strategy on 
Disaster Risk Management (NPSDRM) was developed in 2013. The policy marks a milestone in the 
transition from crisis response toward more integrated approaches in DRM. The DRM Strategic Program 
and Investment Framework (DRM-SPIF), developed in 2014, was intended to operationalize the DRM 
policy by identifying priority investment areas with financing need estimated to be provided by the 
Government of Ethiopia (GoE) and development partners. To manage disaster risks, the 2013 NPSDRM 
and 2014 DRM-SPIF call for the EDRMC (formerly, NDRMC) and the lead agencies to develop a specific 
framework for action to reduce disaster risk and design mechanisms for efficient and harmonized fund 
allocation and utilization. This objective however has yet to be attained while the DRM-SPIF remains to 
be used, programmed, and budgeted, while the GoE lacks a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) mechanism 
to track progress made toward implementing the DRM policy and the DRM-SPIF. Policy coordination is 
weak notwithstanding an existing Guideline for Mainstreaming Disaster Risks into the Development 
Planning Process and Future Investment Decisions (2017), as the respective institutional units at the 
regional and woreda39 levels have been established, but do not have the necessary institutional weight. 
Further, the existing technical and financing resources and capacities across the different sectors and 
levels of government are limited. Overcoming this challenge has gained further urgency with the need to 
build additional capacity to manage complex, conflict-induced emergencies. Finally, a critical underlying 
factor for the policy delivery gap of DRM in Ethiopia relates to the missing regulatory and implementation 
framework. Although recommended in the NPSDRM, a national law on DRM to assign ministries and 
government entities their respective roles and mandates related to DRM has yet to be drafted or issued.  
15. 
Ethiopia’s latest DRM reform seeks to address some of the underlying deficiencies, but 
institutional challenges remain, and capacity-building support is urgently needed. Although DRM does 
not feature prominently in the recently updated 10-year development plan (2021–2030) of the National 
Planning Commission of Ethiopia, the latest reform of Ethiopia’s DRM system (with the EDRMC reporting 
directly to the Prime Minister’s Office) reflects a strong commitment toward strengthening the legislative 
basis and institutional structure to better fulfill its mandate and meet the country’s DRM challenges. 
Acknowledging DRM as a cross-cutting issue, a key pillar of the reform includes the revision of the 
NPSDRM, and the preparation of DRM proclamations, regulations, and directives, as well as the revision 
 
39 Districts of Ethiopia, also called woredas, are the third-level of the administrative divisions of Ethiopia – after zones and the 
regional states. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Flood Management Project (P176327) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 82  
  
 
of the multisectorial DRM mainstreaming guidelines. This strategic and comprehensive DRM sector 
reform is being undertaken with the support of development partners.  
16. 
The GoE has also identified the need to further enhance preparedness to disasters. Aligned with 
the national DRM policy and through donor-funded technical assistance support, emergency 
preparedness and response (EP&R) initiatives—mainly in urban areas—have been carried out (including 
the development of city emergency plans, training of firefighters, and training on international good 
practices) that guide how personnel work together during all incidents, from traffic accidents to major 
disasters. However, the EP&R capacity of most cities in the country is characterized by a lack of basic 
emergency response resources, including adequate equipment, qualified personnel, and other 
resources.40 With growth in urban population, and the related exposure to fire hazard, higher fire-related 
mortality is expected, which is already close to twenty times the rate in middle- and high-income 
countries. 41 Improvements are needed not only for overall safety, but also to enhance each city’s 
competitiveness and its potential to attract and retain investments. 
17. 
The GoE currently has limited pre-arranged and earmarked financial instruments to provide 
timely and sufficient financial resources to meet the needs resulting from disasters. The Productive 
Safety Net Programme (PSNP) has significant reach but suffers from its dependency on international 
donors, a slow resource securing process that is only initiated following lengthy needs assessments, as 
well as the mobilization of only limited and uncertain funding amounts. There is a federal-level 
contingency budget line for emergency response, although it is not exclusively committed to disasters and 
is of limited size, depleting quickly following significant shock events. The Amhara and Oromia regions 
have small contingency funds in place42 but their exact purpose, size, and institutional arrangements with 
federal government bodies are not clearly defined. Other risk finance instruments mostly focus on 
drought-related agriculture risks, are of small scale, and are externally financed. Currently, there is no 
policy agenda or structured institutional arrangement on disaster risk financing (DRF). There is significant 
scope to introduce and improve financial protection to protect the fiscal balance, sub-national 
governments, households, and businesses in the event of shocks. 
18. 
Multiple government entities play their respective roles in flood risk management, requiring 
close coordination and joint implementation of flood risk management-related activities. The Ministry 
of Water and Energy (MoWE) is the overarching institution for flood risk management, mandated for 
water resource management, flood protection, forecasting, and early warning, and the provision of 
meteorological services. It fulfills this mandate in coordination with a range of parastatal agencies and 
authorities structured under MoWE, including the Basins Development Offices (BDOs) and the Ethiopian 
Meteorology Institute (EMI). The BDOs are responsible for the major river basins, where it leads flood 
management efforts, including the construction, operation, and maintenance of flood protection 
measures (for example, river training, dikes, and retention basins), river and flow monitoring, and river 
basin development plans. Urban floods are under the responsibility of the Ministry of Urban Development 
and Infrastructure (MoUDI), resulting in coordination challenges related to the protection of cities from 
river floods and the encroachment of settlements into flood hazard areas. Weather and climate services 
 
40 World Bank/GFDRR, 2017. Safe and Resilient Cities in Ethiopia. City Strength Diagnostics in Nine Regional Capitals and Dire 
Dawa City Administration. 
41 Ibid. 
42 Designed with the support of the EU’s Decentralization of Disaster Risk Management in Ethiopia program. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Flood Management Project (P176327) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 82  
  
 
are provided ‘in-house’ through EMI. The Flood Task Force, a coordinating body headed by the EDRMC, is 
activated mainly in the event of flooding to provide operational guidance, monitor the flooding situation, 
and disseminate early warning information to at-risk populations.  
19. 
 Significant challenges remain in strategic and integrated planning for flood risk reduction 
investments, as well as in coordination for proper monitoring and dissemination of hydromet 
information. Currently, there is no existing flood investment framework for Ethiopia at the national, 
regional, or basin levels. The respective agencies tasked with flood protection and management 
predominantly act in response to flood events, while proactive, integrated, and risk-informed approaches 
in flood management remain to be developed. Accordingly, flood protection infrastructures are 
constructed after major flood events, while the lack of financial resources and institutional capacity limit 
the geographic coverage and quality of those measures to adequately address the country’s needs for 
flood protection. Relatedly, data infrastructure and services for early warning and stream flow monitoring 
have improved in recent years, but the geographic coverage of observation and gauging stations to 
provide sufficient and accurate forecasting remains low. The lack, and under-exploitation, of 
hydrometeorological services and data presents a fundamental impediment to flood risk assessment and 
to the design of flood protection and drainage infrastructure, while poor monitoring and dissemination of 
early warning information limits the capacity of exposed populations to take precautionary measures in 
the event of flooding. 
20. 
There is need to better address the gender-related differences in vulnerability and strengthen 
women’s representation and agency in DRM. While empirical evidence for Ethiopia is scarce, low gender 
equality and persistent gender gaps in key socio-economic indicators (notably employment, wage and 
literacy rate43,44,45) help explain differences in the patterns of vulnerability. In particular, women are 
severely affected during disaster displacement, as it tends to reinforce harmful pre-existing gender norms 
that perpetuate socioeconomic disadvantages. 46  The 2020 floods showed that flood-affected 
communities faced heightened exposure to protection risks (such as gender-based violence [GBV]), 
psychosocial distress/trauma, and increased reliance on negative coping mechanisms (that is, child labor, 
child abduction, transactional sex). 47 , 48 Moreover, there is a pronounced gender gap in emergency 
preparedness and response, which is shaped by differences in the ownership and access to 
communication technologies such as television, radio or, mobile phones. Due to limited resources and 
social norms women in Ethiopia are not likely to have the same access to communication technologies as 
men. While 46 percent of male-owned businesses used mobile phones for business purposes, only 3 
percent of female-owned businesses did.49 The NPSDRM acknowledges that women are among the most 
vulnerable to disasters while the GoE is committed to establishing mechanisms to ensure that DRM-
related laws, directives, programs, and plans are developed with gender considerations. A guideline for 
gender mainstreaming in DRM, which was developed in 2012 by the Women Directorate of NDRMC,50 
 
43 Team and Hassen, 2016. 48 Climate change and complexity of gender issues in Ethiopia. Systemic Crises of Global Climate 
Change: Intersections of race, class and gender, pp. 314-326. 
44 World Bank. 2019. Ethiopia Gender Diagnostic Report: Priorities for Promoting Equity.  
45 World Bank, 2019. Gender Data Portal: Ethiopia. https://www.worldbank.org/en/data/datatopics/gender/country/Ethiopia 
46 Cazabat et al, 2021. Women and Girls in Internal Displacement. 
47 Joint Government-Humanitarian Response Plan, Ethiopia – 2020 Kiremt Season Floods. 
48 See Annex 6 for an overview of the gendered dimensions of DRM in Ethiopia. 
49 World Bank, 2021. Ethiopia Gender Gap Profile. Gendered Dimensions of Disaster Risk Management 
50 NDRMC, 20212. Guideline for Gender Mainstreaming in Disaster Risk Management. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Flood Management Project (P176327) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 82  
  
 
formulates a vision and key actions for gender inclusion. In practice, however, women remain 
inadequately represented in decision-making, planning, policy formulation, and evaluation in DRM, and 
there is need to update the Guideline in alignment with the DRM policy reform.  
21. 
In light of the recent conflict in Ethiopia, and the complex FCV dynamics in some parts of the 
country, the project proposes a conflict-sensitive targeting approach where physical investments and 
activities are geographically concentrated outside of conflict-affected areas. Accordingly, the project 
will not engage in Tigray or any other conflict-affected areas. The project’s framework approach 
moreover provides the necessary flexibility to prioritize and select sub-projects for implementation, in 
consideration of the most urgent needs for flood protection and disaster risk reduction. 
C. Relevance to Higher-Level Objectives 
 
22. 
The project supports the World Bank’s twin goals to end extreme poverty and promote shared 
prosperity. Through physical investments in flood risk reduction and support for institutional 
strengthening, the project seeks to mitigate the human, social, and welfare impacts of floods and other 
disasters. Project activities will specifically contribute toward reducing the exposure and vulnerability

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

in 
incorporating climate change and resilience into its development strategy and acknowledges the progress 
made in natural resource management and reducing the vulnerability to climate shocks, in particular, 
droughts. The project supports Objective 2.7. of the CPF to enhance the management of natural resources 
and climate risks, which, among others, states that World Bank operations will continue to support 
resilience to drought and flooding, and introduce policies that reduce climate and disaster risks. 
24. 
The project supports the priority themes under the World Bank’s Africa Strategy 2019-2023 and 
the World Bank Group strategy for FCV 2020-2025, both of which contribute to the World Bank’s twin 
goals. Conflicts drive eighty percent of all humanitarian needs globally, while they reduce GDP growth by 
2–8 percentage points per year on average.52 Failure to effectively address FCV will leave Ethiopia highly 
dependent on emergency humanitarian aid and prevent it from shifting toward a more sustainable 
development approach. The World Bank’s Africa Strategy aims to accelerate poverty reduction and shared 
prosperity through: (a) sustainable and inclusive growth; (b) strengthening of human capital; and (c) 
building of resilience to fragility and climate change. The proposed FMP specifically advances the third 
 
51 World Bank, 2021. World Bank Group Climate Change Action Plan 2021–2025: Supporting Green, Resilient, and Inclusive 
Development. 
52 World Bank, 2020. Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 2020–2025. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Flood Management Project (P176327) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 82  
  
 
area by investing in flood risk reduction and strengthen government capacities for DRM. In terms of the 
World Bank Group FCV Strategy, the project acknowledges that the nexus of FCV and climate change 
(including climate-related disasters) can undermine human security. In alignment with one of the 
Strategy’s core principles, the project will support the shift from reactive to proactive and anticipatory 
responses by addressing some of the underlying drivers, including climate and disaster-related factors, 
that jeopardize livelihoods and fuel conflicts. The project will help implement the World Bank Group 
strategy “From COVID-19 Crisis Response to Resilient Recovery - Saving Lives and Livelihoods while 
Supporting Green, Resilient and Inclusive Development” 53, by protecting vulnerable population groups 
against disaster impacts and helping secure livelihood sources as a basis for sustained social and economic 
development in Ethiopia. Finally, the project supports the implementation of the World Bank’s Global 
Crisis Response Framework (GCRF) by combing short-term crisis response with long-term sustainable 
development, specifically in relation to Pillar 3 “Strengthening Resilience”. The project will enhance 
Ethiopia’s resilience to flooding and other disaster-related shocks by strengthening institutional capacities 
for flood and disaster risk management, emergency preparedness and response, and climate adaptation.54 
25. 
The project will support the GoE in its efforts to reduce poverty through quality growth and to 
build longer-term disaster and climate resilience. The project is aligned with Ethiopia’s latest 
development plans, including the ten-year development plan 55  and the second growth and 
transformation plan,56 which identify flood control and the mitigation of flood and runoff impacts, as well 
as disaster prevention and preparedness, as strategic priorities for longer-term development. Specifically, 
the project will support the operationalization and implementation of the NPSDRM and the DRM-SPIF. 
The project will also enable the GoE to implement the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 
2015–2030 and its nationally determined contributions in response to the Paris Agreement, and 
contribute to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).57 Moreover, the project is aligned with regional 
DRM strategies, such as the African Union’s Disaster Risk Reduction Strategy and Programme58 and the 
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) Regional Flood Risk Management Strategy.59 The 
project design and activities are in particular informed by the Ethiopia Risk and Resilience Assessment 
(RRA).60 It identifies the key drivers of FCV, factors and sources of resilience, as well as the contextual risk 
factors, and highlights that recurrent climate crises – including droughts and seasonal floods – remain 
significant drivers of displacement and humanitarian needs in affected regions.  
 
53 World Bank Group, 2021. From COVID-19 Crisis Response to Resilient Recovery - Saving Lives and Livelihoods while Supporting 
Green, Resilient and Inclusive Development (GRID). 
54 World Bank, 2022. Navigating Multiple Crises, Staying the Course on Long-term Development: The World Bank Group’s 
Response to the Crises Affecting Developing Countries. 
55 Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, 2020. Ten Years Development Plan. A Pathway to Prosperity (2021-2030). 
56 Government of Ethiopia, 2016. Growth and Transformation Plan II (GTP II), 2015/16-2019/20. 
57 Disaster risk management cuts across different aspects and sectors of development. There are 25 targets related to disaster 
risk management in 10 of the 17 sustainable development goals, namely: Goals 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 11, 13, 14, and 15.  
58 https://au.int/sites/default/files/documents/33005-doc-sendai_framework_for_drr_2015-2030-en.pdf 
59 IGAD, 2021. IGAD Regional Flood Risk Development Strategy 2020-2030. 
60 World Bank, 2022. Ethiopia Risk and Resilience Assessment (RRA), unpublished 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Flood Management Project (P176327) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 82

A. Project Development Objective 
PDO Statement 
26. 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen Ethiopia’s institutional capacity for 
disaster risk management, and flood risk management in selected basins.  
PDO Level Indicators 
27. 
The achievement of the PDO will be monitored and measured through the following key 
results indicators, which will be disaggregated by gender, where applicable:  
(a) Strengthened institutional and coordination capacity for disaster risk management 
(qualitative, climate change adaptation); 
(b) People benefiting from reduced risks from floods (number, gender disaggregated, climate 
change adaptation); and 
(c) 
Land area benefiting from reduced risks from floods (area, climate change adaptation);  
(d) People benefitting from impact-based flood early warnings (number, gender disaggregated, 
climate change adaptation). 
B. Project Components 
 
28. 
The project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF) for an International Development 
Association (IDA) grant of US$300 million. The project will be implemented over a period of five years. 
The project consists of four components as described below. 
Component 1: Strengthening Institutional and Coordination Capacity for DRM (US$30 million IDA 
equivalent) 
29. 
This component aims to improve the GoE DRM by strengthening the institutional capacity of 
federal-level agencies (including priority sectors) and the coordination between federal and 
decentralized levels of the government. Specifically, it will enhance the functions of the new EDRMC as 
the federal-level coordinator to enable DRM integration in various priority sectors and in lower levels of 
the government. For this purpose, the four areas prioritized by the GoE are: (a) strengthening federal and 
regional DRM coordination, and DRM mainstreaming in key sectors; (b) investing in EP&R; (c) 
strengthening DRF; and, (d) raising disaster risk awareness.  
(a) To strengthen federal and regional DRM coordination and DRM mainstreaming in key 
sectors, the project will finance activities including: providing technical assistance  to support 
the DRM sector reform; developing the government’s M&E framework and digital system to 
track DRM progress; establishing a National Digital Risk Information Platform (NDRIP); 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Flood Management Project (P176327) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 82  
  
 
revising the existing DRM and gender mainstreaming guidelines; providing technical 
assistance to integrate DRM in planning instruments and tools (such as plans, regulation 
standards, manuals) in key sectors (for example, urban development); providing technical 
assistance to key sectors to undertake risk assessment and risk-informed infrastructure 
investment planning; and strengthening risk-informed urban planning and building 
regulations for resilience.  
(b) To invest in EP&R, the project will finance activities including: acquiring and testing search 
and rescue equipment and emergency communication systems; developing and testing 
relevant standard operating procedures; and designing and delivering training-related 
activities. 
(c) 
To strengthen DRF, the project will finance activities for technical assistance and capacity 
building to develop operational, policy, and legal frameworks for the establishment of 
specific instruments to address the GoE’s strategic priorities. 
(d) To raise disaster risk awareness, the project will finance activities including: providing 
professional training through collaborations with universities and higher institutions; 
designing and implementing a gender-sensitive disaster risk awareness and communication 
strategy; and strengthening the training and research unit at the EDRMC to design and 
implement regular awareness raising programs and campaigns at the national, regional, and 
woreda levels that target government and sector officials and the general public.  
30. 
Furthermore, capacity building in the form of customized training of target individuals within the 
project implementing entities and at priority federal and regional levels, as well as other lower-level 
administrations will be conducted throughout the implementation of activities that will be financed under 
Component 1. 
31. 
Component 1 supports the implementation of the World Bank’s GCRF, Pillar 3 “Strengthening 
Resilience”, by facilitating the development of policy frameworks, regulations and institutional capacities 
for disaster preparedness and response at the national and subnational levels. 
Component 2: Accelerating Flood Risk Management (US$258 million IDA equivalent) 
32. 
This component aims to accelerate flood risk management by investing in physical 
infrastructure to reduce flood risks, strengthening hydromet services and impact-based flood early 
warning systems (FEWSs), increasing community-level preparedness and awareness, and providing 
technical assistance and capacity building to facilitate integrated flood risk management (IFRM). The 
component will also implement strategic studies for future physical investments and provide technical 
assistance for the operationalization and sustainability of physical investments.  
33. 
Component 2 supports the implementation of the World Bank’s GCRF, Pillar 3 “Strengthening 
Resilience”, by investing in flood mitigation measures, reducing the vulnerability to flooding and 
improving the institutional and technical capacities to manage flooding and cope with climate change and 
other drivers of future risks. 
34. 
As a programmatic approach for long-term flood resilience, the concept of IFRM will be 
introduced throughout interventions and guide the activities of Component 2. Throughout the project, 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Flood Management Project (P176327) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 82  
  
 
IFRM will address coherent and effective combination of physical and non-physical measures as well as 
the entire disaster management cycle from risk assessment, risk reduction and preparedness, to response 
and recovery. In addition, the quality of infrastructure and the life cycle cost of physical investments will 
be considered to sustain expected functions of flood risk reduction infrastructures. A risk-based approach 
will be adopted across the flood risk management cycle while close coordination and collaboration across 
the sub-components will ensure complementarity, maximize the impacts of the investment, and support 
the PDO. Understanding the basin-level flood risk profile (including its dynamics) will inform all IFRM 
interventions, such as risk reduction investments, flood early warning, preparedness and response, and 
community engagement and awareness raising. 
35. 
The target basins for flood risk management interventions under this component have been 
categorized into Priority Basins and Strategic Study Basins. Priority Basins are basins in which flood risk 
reduction and related civil work shall be implemented under the project (see Sub-component 2.1); in 
Strategic Study Basins, basin-level comprehensive studies will be conducted to identify investment needs 
and priority physical interventions, whereas civil works will not be implemented in these basins under the 
project (see Sub-component 2.4). Within the Strategic Study Basins, detailed design studies may follow 
the basin-level comprehensive studies, for the Wabi-Shebele and Genale-Dawa basins. The target basins 
for the FMP are as follows: 
(a) Priority Basins: Awash, Omo, and Rift Valley Lakes  
(b) Strategic Study Basins: Abbay, Baro-Akobo, Wabi-Shebele, and Genale-Dawa  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Flood Management Project (P176327) 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 82  
  
 
Figure 1a. Target Basins of the FMP: Priority Basins (purple) and Strategic Study Basins (blue) 
  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Flood Management Project (P176327) 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 82  
  
 
Figure 1b. Overlay of administrative regions and river basins in Ethiopia61 
 
36. 
The target basins were identified and selected in consultation with MoWE and in consideration 
of multiple criteria including flood risk, frequency and impacts of flood event, readiness of investments, 
transboundary nature, as well as using a conflict-sensitive targeting approach. The Priority Basins, in 
which flood risk reduction and related civil works shall be implemented, were selected based on frequency 
and impact of previous flood events especially those in 2020, and other pipeline project and 
transboundary nature were considered. The Priority Basins were affected by severe flooding over the past 
years, and contain areas with high current and expected future flood risk due to strong population and 
urban growth dynamics in riparian areas. Strategic Study Basins are also at high risk of flooding and some 
were also impacted by flooding in recent years; however, due to lack of or lower readiness of pipeline 
projects and/or transboundary nature, basin-level studies need to be conducted first to identify 
investment needs and priority physical interventions. Moreover, the project puts forward a conflict-
sensitive geographic targeting approach. All target basins are located outside of areas and regions with 
high levels of conflict and insecurity; there will be no engagement in the Tigray Region under the FMP. In 
recent years, some incidences of political violence have been recorded at the fringes of the Priority and 
Strategic Study Basins. However, these are typically of lower intensity, and located in border areas and 
beyond the main river channels, where physical investments and studies for flood risk reduction will be 
concentrated. 62  During project implementation, the conflict and security situation in the target 
woredas/Regions will be closely monitored. 
 
61 Source: own design, based on World Bank Data Catalog, 2016 
62 See Figure 2.3 (in Annex 2) for an overview of the latest conflict developments.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Flood Management Project (P176327) 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 82  
  
 
Sub-component 2.1: Basin-level Flood Risk Reduction Investments 
37. 
This sub-component will focus on basin-level physical flood risk reduction investments including 
nature-based solutions in the Priority Basins. It will support the following activities: (a) the production or 
refinement of feasibility studies; (b) detailed design studies; (c) the provision of bidding document; (d) the 
supervision of civil works; (e) implementation of civil works; and, (f) TA and capacity-building activities for 
flood risk management and to ensure the sustainability of the physical investment. The default design 
standard will be set at a return period of 50 years (2 percent annual exceedance probability), but may be 
adjusted based on factors such as exposure, vulnerability, and the country and basin-wide equity and 
balance.  
38. 
An assessment of the readiness of investments for the Priority Basins has identified a few key 
sub-projects which have good readiness for implementation. The Awash basin has two complete 
feasibility studies which assessed river training for the most vulnerable areas of the upper, middle, and 
lower Awash. The studies estimated the total construction costs to exceed the fund allocation for this sub-
component. The studies achieved data collection including topographic survey, hydrological analysis, 
environmental and social impact assessment including initial feedback from local governments and target 
communities, and prepared draft design of physical investments. Building upon the valuable studies, an 
additional study will be conducted during the first two years of the project to finalize detailed design, 
bidding documents, and environment and social instruments by ensuring basin wide hydrological 
consistency, enhancing flood risk assessment including hazard mapping, selecting best technical option 
among candidates potentially including Nature Based Solutions, addressing operation and maintenance 
(O&M) and life cycle cost, and further engaging stakeholders and communities. The terms of reference 
for this study are in the final stage of preparation. The Omo basin and Rift Valley Lakes basin have 
candidate target areas which are at high flood risk and require urgent physical investments. However, in 
the absence of sufficient feasibility studies for both basins, this project will initiate basin-wide holistic 
studies for flood risk management including hydrological and hydraulic analysis in the beginning of project 
implementation. Then, specific physical investments in the Omo and Rift-Valley Lakes basins will be 
prioritized and selected for implementation under the project by applying the strategic investment 
framework. The physical interventions for flood risk reduction will change the flood risk profile of target 
riverine/lakeside areas significantly, highlighting the importance of risk communication and community 
engagement, as well as coordination with other sub-component activities. 
 
39. 
A strategic investment framework for flood risk management was developed to guide the risk-
informed prioritization of the investments. This framework approach also allows flexibility in 
implementation, which is pertinent in Ethiopia’s current FCV context. The strategic investment framework 
will first assess the current and future flood risks (reflecting projected climate and socioeconomic 
changes) in the Priority Basins applying a probabilistic approach, and then apply the following criteria for 
prioritization of the investments: (a) urgency to reduce flood risk; (b) strategic alignment with relevant 
policies, water resources management, and basin plans; and, (c) sub-project readiness, including proper 
design principles and life cycle cost considerations. The framework will further consider the targeting of 
poor/vulnerable communities to better contribute to poverty reduction. This framework was developed 
with the support of a World Bank-executed technical assistance63, and through close consultations with 
MoWE. This framework will be referenced in the POM as the approach to prioritize and select the sub-
 
63 Enhancing Disaster Resilience in Ethiopia (TF0B5243)