[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 50475 chars (27.9% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

The World Bank
 
Ethiopia Rural Connectivity for Food Security Program (P176303)
 
2 
 
necessary to address these constraints, particularly farmer-market linkages that can provide significant incentives for 
farmers to increase production and improve the availability and flow of food across markets.  Rural connectivity also 
influences the time and efficiency with which markets can be accessed by farmers.  This, in turn, significantly reduces post-
harvest losses, improves food availability, and increases rural incomes, while reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.  
4. 
Ethiopia's development strategy prioritizes rapid agricultural productivity gains and commercialization of 
smallholder agriculture to drive food systems growth, enhance competitiveness of strategic agri-food value chains, catalyze 
efficient agricultural investment, and rebuild rural livelihoods. There is a strong push to increase food production and bring 
surpluses produced to markets. This would increase both availability and access to food; the two key elements of food 
security. Central to this endeavor, given the rugged terrain, is connecting rural households to markets through the provision 
of access to rural roads, crossing structures such as bridges of various types, and creating new digital solutions. 
5. 
While progress has been made on improving the main trunk and link road network, the rural roads at woreda8 
levels need significant improvement to ensure year-round access. Enhancing the rural road network, including the 
provision of critical bridges, will support the full logistics chain serving the agriculture sector and will help to significantly 
reduce the costs of transportation. Rural roads that link to areas of high agricultural potential will be prioritized for financing 
in this operation. Additionally, investment in market services is essential to translate the physical linkages enabled by 
investments in rural roads into tangible market opportunities.  
6. 
As Ethiopia moves toward becoming a middle-income country, the transport sector will play a vital role in the 
country's economic and social development. Roads are a critical lifeline for a country like Ethiopia that is landlocked. 
Centers of agricultural production especially, as well as manufacturing, and consumption all have to be connected to local, 
regional, and international markets across the logistics chain, making transport central to any development strategy. For 
farmers, low accessibility constrains the ability to get the best prices for their produce, increases the cost of transport of 
inputs, e.g., seeds, fertilizers, farm implements, and leads to unnecessary loss and wastage of produce. 
B. Multi-Sectoral and Institutional Context
7. 
Ethiopia is a country with a large land area and a diverse topography, with different climates across the country 
posing varied climate risks which can impact transport infrastructure and services, agricultural value chains and food 
security. Temperatures have been increasing with higher rates of warming being observed in the central and highland 
areas. There is a strong regional variability in rainfall and significant inter-decadal and year-to-year volatility. Ethiopia has 
a high risk of hydrometeorological hazards and natural disasters. Flash floods and riverine floods regularly cause damage 
to crops, markets and transport infrastructure. Poorly maintained transport infrastructure is particularly vulnerable to 
climate hazards. Climate projections show a continued increase in temperature and increased rainfall variability. Land 
degradation and soil erosion are expected to be exacerbated by recurrent floods, droughts, and water scarcity in some 
areas of the country. The variability of rainfall patterns and the resulting natural hazards such as floods are expected to 
impact connectivity, disrupting access to markets as well as basic social services in rural communities. All these factors 
impact food value chains, which adds to the risk of food insecurity.  
8. 
An impact evaluation study conducted by the World Bank estimated that rural roads developed under the 
Government of Ethiopia (GoE)’s Road Sector Development Program (RSDP) increased household welfare by 23 percent 
between 2012 and 2016. Moreover, households were less likely to fall into, or remain in, poverty when connected by rural 
roads in drought areas, indicating the role of rural roads in strengthening resilience to drought shocks. The analysis also 
found that rural roads development has affected agricultural and non-agricultural work. More farmers have come to sell 
their crops once connected to rural roads. More households—particularly women and youth—have engaged in wage jobs 
in remote communities. By connecting to markets, rural roads have widened the economic base in otherwise physically 
and economically isolated communities. In addition, the study pointed out major challenges facing the existing rural road 
 
8  “Woreda” is the lowest level of elected government in Ethiopia.   
 
The World Bank
 
Ethiopia Rural Connectivity for Food Security Program (P176303)
 
3 
 
network including: (i) the lack of regular maintenance, (ii) missing bridges (e.g., 1200 bridges for 20 percent of the rural 
network), (iii) the lack of careful planning and prioritization of network expansions, and (iv) the need for continued 
institutional strengthening and capacity building.  
9. 
Nearly 80 percent of the Ethiopian population live in rural areas where significant road network improvements 
have been registered since 2011; however, rural connectivity remains relatively low. Rural road coverage saw an increase 
of 152 percent from 1997/98 to 2009/10 prior to the initiation of the Universal Rural Roads Access Program (URRAP). After 
the end of the first URRAP in 2015, there was a more significant expansion by 580 percent from the baseline in 1997/98. 
By 2021/22, the length of rural roads reached 102,269 km, up from 10,680 km in 1997/98. On average, the distance to the 
nearest all-weather road is 4.4 km, with an average travel time of 1 hour and 26 minutes.  Despite this progress, some 
production areas remain poorly connected to markets and gaps are still identified in a benchmarking study of road density9. 
The road density per 1000 sq. km in Ethiopia is 130.9 km, much lower than Africa’s average of 204 km, and slightly lower 
than the Sub-Saharan country average of 140 km. This operation will address these gaps by investing in the construction 
and upgrading of rural roads and investing in digital solutions to link farmers to markets. 
10. 
The Government of Ethiopia (GoE) initiated a comprehensive Homegrown Economic Reform Agenda (HGERA) 
in September 2019 building upon the foundation established under its second Growth and Transformation Plan 2015/16 
to 2019/20 (GTP II). The HGERA aims to create an economic environment supportive of higher private investment and 
structural transformation towards accelerated growth, and overall food and nutrition security. Amongst the key set of 
reforms under HGERA, the government proposed to improve the country’s stock of transport infrastructure with ambitious 
goals of increasing coverage, quality, safety, resilience, and efficiency. In addition, sectoral reforms in agriculture are aimed 
inter alia at enhancing effective linkages between agriculture producers and commodity markets, thereby promoting 
commercialization of food systems. 
11. 
The budget allocation for the construction and maintenance of rural roads under GTP II was insufficient, which 
was attributed to the absence of a well-defined and sustainable road fund, particularly at the lower levels. Funding for 
rural roads came from a mix of sources, including federal funds subject to availability, allocations from Regional Road 
Entities, and contributions from rural communities, both in-kind and monetary. However, this method of funding was 
piecemeal and unsustainable, leading to budget constraints and the prolonged exclusion of certain regions from the 
program. Over the last 23 years, a total of ETB 70,031.4 million was earmarked for Woreda road upgrading/construction, 
with ETB 41,268.4 million (59 percent) being specifically allocated to URRAP roads. In the same timeframe, out of the ETB 
3,482.0 million budgeted for Woreda road maintenance, only 19 percent was disbursed. This meager allocation for 
maintenance has led to the rapid degradation of Woreda roads, as they receive insufficient attention and resources for 
their proper upkeep. This operation aims to close these gaps by utilizing a separate and targeted disbursement linked 
indicator (DLI) for rural road maintenance. 
12. 
GoE has prepared a Transport Sector’s 10-year perspective development plan which was officially launched in 
2021. Its main objective is to enhance the accessibility of target populations served by roads to markets and services and 
strengthen the institutional capabilities of the road sector to deliver and maintain roads in a safe and satisfactory condition. 
Targets are set for transport infrastructure, transport services, safety, logistics, environmental climate changes, 
implementation, and capacity building initiatives.  
13. 
Improving rural communities' accessibility to agricultural inputs and market opportunities is critical for 
physically connecting both producers and consumers to markets. While food security depends on many factors, this 
operation is prioritizing accessibility of potentially high food production areas to markets. This catalyzes increased 
agricultural production and contributes to reduced post-harvest losses thus improving availability of food and improving 
 
9 International Benchmarking of South Africa’s Infrastructure Performance: Infrastructure Development in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Scorecard: Affric 
IRF World Road Statistics 2019, latest year of available data for countries a’s Infrastructure, A Time for Transformation: The Global Competitiveness 
Report (2017/18) 
 
The World Bank
 
Ethiopia Rural Connectivity for Food Security Program (P176303)
 
4 
 
the flow of food from surplus production to food deficit areas, improving overall access to food. The selection criteria 
developed under this operation will ensure targeting of food producing areas and complementarity with other World Bank-
funded projects aimed at increased agricultural production, agricultural market development, and overall resilience 
strengthening of the food chain systems (both crops and livestock). This would allow greater integration of road accessibility 
and agriculture growth.   
14. 
The following agencies have responsibility across the road classification profiles: Ministry of Urban and 
Infrastructure (MUI) is responsible for road sectoral policy, and oversight; Ethiopian Roads Administration (ERA) 
oversees the federal link roads and expressways; the Regional Road Entities (RRE)10 oversee regional roads, while 
Woreda Road Offices (WRO) have responsibilities over woreda roads. Urban roads are managed by the relevant urban 
authorities. However, there has been a continuous overlap in responsibilities and interventions given overlapping 
mandates, lack of capacity at the lower levels, and a bucket of financing sources that employ different implementation 
modalities. Results of an ERA modernization report shows that there are critical problems with the arrangements and 
performance of the existing organizational structure of RRE. Poorly defined departmental roles and communication with 
stakeholders lead to confusion and inconsistent understanding of policies and operational plans within RRE. The operation 
aims to streamline sector responsibilities and bolster institutional capacity at all levels.  
15. 
Like many other low- and middle-income countries, Ethiopia has failed to achieve the United Nations (UN) 
Decade of Action 2011–2020 target of reducing road deaths by 50 percent; however, the second UN Decade of Actions 
for Road Safety 2021–2030 provides the opportunity to act and commit to reducing road traffic deaths and injuries by at 
least 50 percent from 2021 to 2030.11  Vulnerable road users (pedestrians, cyclists, people with disabilities, or the elderly) 
represent most fatalities, at 45 percent compared to other road users, and 60 percent of crashes affect the most productive 
age group (15 - 64 years) with a 2:1 ratio of male to female fatalities. Road safety remains a key concern for the sector as 
the country is losing an estimated 21,258 lives on the road each year, with 18 deaths per 100,000 people as of 2021, 
significantly impacting GDP12. This figure is slightly below the Sub-Saharan Africa average of 19 but much higher than the 
global average of 15. The cost of road crashes is estimated at US$6,516 million, equivalent to 8.8 percent of the country’s 
GDP.13  
16. 
To achieve the target of reducing road traffic fatalities by 50 percent by 2030, Ethiopia launched a National 
Road Safety Strategy in 2022. This strategy demonstrates the government's commitment to reducing road crashes. Road 
safety is considered vital in the Transport Sector’s 10-year perspective development plan. It is one of the six core objectives 
of the transport sector, with a dedicated target of fatality reduction. To improve vulnerable road users’ safety and promote 
active transportation, Ethiopia adopted a Non-Motorized Transport Strategy (2020-2029). It is essential to ensure safer 
roadways to prevent a significant increase in crash fatalities and injuries due to increased speed and other risks on the road.  
17. 
There is a clear gender employment gap in Ethiopia, especially in the transport sector. According to a World 
Bank study, women are 17 percent less likely than men to participate in the national labor force. 14 This disparity widens to 
29 percent when considering other factors such as age, education, and household wealth. In addition, women occupy a 
much smaller share of technical positions in the formal wage sector, where women account for only 30 percent of the 
professional workforce. In addition, of the people employed in the transport and communication sector, women represent 
10 percent, while they represent 12 percent of the people employed in construction. According to the Labor Proclamation 
No. 1156/2019, it is prohibited to assign women on works that may be listed by the government to be particularly 
 
10 Regional Road Entities have various names across regions, such as Road and Logistics Bureau, Transport and Road Development Bureau, Road 
Bureau, Regional Road and Transport Bureaus, Regional Bureaus of Transport, and Regional Road Bureaus, among others. 
11 United Nations (2020). General Assembly. Seventy-fourth session Agenda item 12 Improving global road safety. 
https://undocs.org/en/A/RES/74/299.   
12 WHO Global Status Report on Road Safety 2023 
13 Global Road Safety Facility; Road Safety Country Profile; https://www.roadsafetyfacility.org/country/ethiopia 
14 World Bank. 2019. Ethiopia Gender Diagnostic Report: Priorities for Promoting Equity. World Bank, Washington, DC. © World Bank. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/31420 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.” 
 
The World Bank
 
Ethiopia Rural Connectivity for Food Security Program (P176303)
 
5 
 
dangerous to women or hazardous to their health. Barriers to participation include but are not limited to lack of skills, 
gender stereotypes, lack of gender sensitive recruitment practices, and absence of mechanisms to prevent and respond to 
sexual harassment. 
18. 
Women face restrictions to improved productivity in agriculture and better access to trade. Women make up 
more than 40 percent of the agricultural labor force and head approximately 25 percent of all farming households; however, 
they face acute challenges to improve their productivity, and they have less access to land and other factors of production 
than men.15 Women also experience lower returns than men from a given level of resource expenditure. These lower 
returns relate to elements such as social norms, market failures, and institutional constraints that prevent resources from 
turning into the same levels of agricultural productivity as they would for men, translating into an agricultural productivity 
gender gap of 36 percent .16 Women traders and entrepreneurs have less access to information and credit which leads to 
men being more actively involved in wholesale and large-scale and agro-processed foods trading, while women participate 
more in retail and small-scale food processing and marketing in towns and rural areas.17 In addition, women’s low 
participation in vegetable wholesale and trade is linked to having to travel long distances from production areas to central 
markets, dealing with transporters, brokers, and buyers.18 
C. Relationship to the CPF and Rationale for Use of Instrument 
19. 
The operation will be financed through a Program-for-Results (PforR) instrument with an Investment Project 
Financing (IPF) component.19  In general, the PforR will focus on the transport sector and roads portion of the operation 
(US$250 million), while the IPF component will focus on strengthening digital agricultural markets and capacity building 
(US$50 million). The PforR financing is suitable given that: (i) the Program will support an existing government program in 
infrastructure; (ii) the instrument allows flexibility for advancing delivery while ensuring compliance with country systems 
for fiduciary and environment and social standards requirements using disbursement linked indicators, and Program Action 
Plan; (iii) the instrument builds government capacity to deliver and sustain its infrastructure at all levels (from federal to 
regional to woreda levels) without the need for oversight at the transaction level and also helps improve corporate 
governance, autonomy, and accountability; and (iv) the rural roads program entails multiple dispersed subprojects for 
which the use of an IPF would entail high transaction costs for both the World Bank and the Government. 
20. 
The PforR financing instrument will support the Transport Sector’s 10-year perspective development plan in 
general, and the Rural Connectivity and Access Program (RCAP) in particular. Through a long-term partnership, the World 
Bank has supported the road sector in Ethiopia with time-tested strengthening of technical, fiduciary, and environment and 
social capacities. Previous operations have used IPF financing with a focus on the oversight of specific investments, given 
the initial nascent capacity and the need to ensure compliance with fiduciary and environment and social requirements. 
The capacity of ERA has improved dramatically and its ability to deliver its road sector program following the existing 
systems is at a level that justifies a transition towards a result-based engagement. Since the rural roads and bridges targeted 
for intervention are at the lower functional classification levels under the RREs and woredas, the Program envisages the 
active participation of MUI and ERA as oversight and technical support entities to ensure Program results are achieved in a 
satisfactory manner.   results are achieved in a satisfactory manner.   
21. 
The IPF component of the operation (project) will strengthen digital agricultural markets and capacity building 
focusing on piloting E-market platforms and on capacity building at the federal, regional, and woreda levels. The project 
will have two windows. The first window will test innovative approaches to strengthen linkages between suppliers and 
 
15 World Bank. (2019). Op. cit. 
16 The World Bank. “Leveling the Field: Improving Opportunities for Women Farmers in Africa.” Washington, DC: World Bank cited Loc. cit. 2014. 
17 FAO. (2019). Ethiopia. Country Gender Assessment Series. National Gender Profile of Agriculture and Rural Livelihoods. Addis Ababa: FAO. 
18 Op. cit. 
19 The overall Word Bank project will be referred to as the “Operation” unless specified otherwise. Where necessary, the IPF component will be 
referred to as the “Project” and the PforR element will be referred to as the “Program.” 
 
The World Bank
 
Ethiopia Rural Connectivity for Food Security Program (P176303)
 
6 
 
buyers through a digital market platform. The second window will enable the Ministry of Urban and Infrastructure (MUI) 
and the Agricultural Transformation Institute (ATI) to manage and coordinate the overall operation and to provide capacity 
and technical assistance support to the regions and woredas during implementation.  
22. 
The Program and project are inherently interconnected within the overall operation, and their complementarity 
will help achieve optimal gains in improved access and connectivity to support food security.  An evaluation study which 
was conducted on the impact of URRAP and agricultural extension programs in Ethiopia identified significant gaps in the 
lack of coordination across the programs, including the absence of a clear prioritization mechanism which resulted in a 
reduction in efficacy and productivity. The Program aims to address these gaps and maximize benefits through measures 
such as: (i) designing selection criteria for prioritizing rural roads within the PforR to incorporate parameters such as the 
potential for agriculture production and surplus-producing Kebeles; and (ii) establishing a Joint Consultative Forum and a 
National Steering Committee comprising members from MUI, ATI, and other relevant ministries, offices and entities to 
ensure coordination, synergy, and integration of the operational activities. The overall interconnection within the operation 
is depicted in Figure 2.  
 
23. 
The operation is aligned with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework for Ethiopia (FY18-22) 
(Report No. 119576)20 and supports the World Bank’s mission to end extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity on a 
livable planet. The operation contributes to the achievement of outcomes under two of the three CPF’s focus areas: Focus 
area 2: Building resilience and inclusiveness which aims on to improve spatial connectivity for equitable growth by 
connecting production centers to markets and connecting secondary cities. Further, the operation’s focus on strengthening 
agricultural productivity aligns with Focus area 1: Promoting structural and economic transformation through increased 
productivity by improving food producers’ access to food markets and reducing post-production losses. The operation 
complements other World Bank investments, particularly the Ethiopia Food Systems Resilience Project (EFSRP) (P176167)- 
by linking EFSRP investments more closely with roads. The operation's interventions align with the Government of 
Ethiopia's Agricultural Sector Perspective Plan (2020-2030) and Revised Agricultural and Rural Development Policy, which 
prioritize food security and farmers' market engagement. Through these complementary efforts and policy alignments, the 
operation aims to support a more resilient and market-oriented food system in Ethiopia. 
 
20 A new CPF is under preparation which builds upon these strategic objectives and focus areas. 
 
The World Bank
 
Ethiopia Rural Connectivity for Food Security Program (P176303)
 
7 
 
24. 
The operation is consistent with Ethiopia’s Nationally Determined Contribution to the UNFCCC (UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change),21 Ethiopia’s National Adaptation Plan (NAP)22, Ethiopia’s Long-term Low Emission and 
Climate Resilient Development Strategy (2020-2050) (LTS), and the Ethiopian Program of Adaptation to Climate Change 
(EPACC). The NAP and the EPACC indicate that transport is one of the most vulnerable sectors to climate shocks in Ethiopia, 
identifying potential impacts related to damaged roads, bridges, and other transport infrastructure, and emphasizing the 
need to protect and improve the lifespan of transport infrastructure. The LTS concludes that Ethiopia’s GHG emissions are 
on the rise with the agriculture sector generating the highest emissions, contributing to about half of total national 
emissions in 2020. The program enhances climate resilience of rural transport, agriculture value chains and the 
communities served. The program invests in upgrading and constructing rural roads, bridges, and special structures to 
climate resilient standards, as well as enhancing adaptive institutional capacity through improved rural road asset 
management systems, rural road and bridges maintenance practices, deployment of an e-platform to improve food flows 
from high food production to deficit areas, reducing food losses and improving food security in the face of climate change. 
The program also contributes to the reduction of GHG emissions from the agriculture sector through reduction in food 
losses and food waste. 
25. 
The operation is aligned with the World Bank’s Next Generation Africa Climate Business Plan23 and with the 
World Bank’s Climate and Development Report (CCDR). The CCDR defines as a priority upgrading and building new 
infrastructure that can withstand climate shocks to close the infrastructure deficit and meet Ethiopia’s development 
aspirations since some of the largest climate impacts will be in the form of damage to infrastructure assets. The CCDR 
identified that the backlog of maintenance of roads and bridges is making transport infrastructure vulnerable to climate 
risks. While investments have been made to develop and deploy a transport asset management system, climate risks and 
resilience considerations still need to be incorporated into the asset management process from planning, design, 
construction, maintenance and emergency response and repair. The project will integrate climate risks and resilience 
considerations in the rural road asset management system and provide training to build institutional capacity and in this 
way inform transport planning and investment prioritization and programming for maintenance, rehabilitation, upgrading 
and construction of infrastructure.

A. Government Program
26. 
The Transport Sector 10-Year Perspective Development Plan (2021 – 2030), launched by the GoE in early 2021, 
identifies focus areas and six goals as follows: Goal 1, Ensuring the fairness and accessibility of the transport infrastructure; 
Goal 2, Making the transport service integrated, fair and accessible; Goal 3, Creating a safe transport service; Goal 4, Making 
the logistics service efficient and reliable; Goal 5, Creating a climate resilient transport infrastructure and services; and Goal 
6, Increasing the efficiency of the sector by building implementation and enforcement capacity. The 10-year plan comprises 
rehabilitation and upgrading of existing roads, including rural roads and heavy maintenance of roads. 
 
21 Ethiopia’s Nationally Determined Contribution to the UNFCCC, 2016. (URL: INDC-Ethiopia-100615 (unfccc.int)) 
22 Ethiopia’s National Adaptation Plan; Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia; 2019. (URL: https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/NAPC/Documents/Parties/NAP-
ETH%20FINAL%20VERSION%20%20Mar%202019.pdf) 
23 World Bank 2020: Next Generation Africa Climate Business Plan – Ramping Up Development Centered Climate Action. World Bank, Washington DC. (URL: Reports 
(worldbank.org)) 
 
The World Bank
 
Ethiopia Rural Connectivity for Food Security Program (P176303)
 
8 
 
B. Theory of Change 
27.  The successful delivery of the operation's outputs will contribute to the expected medium and long-term 
development impacts. These outputs include enhancements in the capacities of the RRE and WRO, along with 
improvements in physical and digital access to rural food markets. Such outputs are expected to lead to the project's 
desired medium-term outcomes, which encompass improved climate-resilient access to food markets and services, 
strengthened institutional capacity for rural roads management, and long-term outcomes that include: enhanced 
road safety, increased resilience to natural disasters, extended service life of roads, promotion of food security, 
narrowed gender disparities, and climate-related co-benefits. Figure 3 illustrates the theory of change. 
 
Figure 3: Theory of Change Progression 
 
 
Key Assumptions: (a) shared understanding and close collaboration among federal, regional, and woreda road sector entities, and 
steering committee; and (b) rural roads selection criteria are maintained. 
 
C. The Operation Scope 
PforR  
Improving Physical Rural Connectivity (US$250 million) 
 
28. 
The PforR will contribute to the implementation of the RCAP, which is part of the GoE’s Transport Sector’s 10-
year perspective development plan (an updated version of the previous URRAP). URRAP was one of the primary road 
sector programs with important goals implemented in Growth and Transformation Plans, GTP I and GTP II. With this road 
development program, it was possible to significantly improve the road sector performance both in terms of coverage and 
quality. Its implementation led to the construction of more than 50 thousand km of all-weather roads. Moreover, the 
program created opportunities for technology transfer, jobs creation and impetus in other sectors, especially in agriculture, 
manufacturing, and business formation. 
29. 
However, the goal of linking every rural community to a main road has not yet been fully realised. Road 
connectivity year-round plays an important role in rural communities by improving accessibility to basic social services and 
 
The World Bank
 
Ethiopia Rural Connectivity for Food Security Program (P176303)
 
9 
 
economic opportunities, and in this way can contribute to reducing poverty and enhancing social inclusiveness / social 
cohesion / social wellbeing of those rural communities. The achievement of this goal is a key reason the Government has 
launched this successor program of RCAP. 
30. 
RCAP will not only help rural community connectivity and accessibility to basic social services but will also play 
a critical role in the economic recovery.  In addition to the agriculture, education, and health sector benefits, the program 
will help contribute to the economic recovery, and post-COVID response by providing employment opportunities not only 
for men, as is traditionally done, but also youth and women. The program will create conditions for cost savings, 

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

ading/construction and maintenance of 
rural roads to climate resilient standards to connect rural kebele centers to the nearest main roads connecting agriculture 
potential areas; (ii) construction of pedestrian suspension crossings (trail bridges) for areas with lack of access because of 
topography; (iii) construction of special structures (pipe culverts, box culverts, bridges, etc.) for lowland and pastoralist 
communities with crossing problems due to seasonal floods; (iv) improving the strategies and practices for planning, 
implementation and management of regional and woreda roads incorporating climate risks and resilience considerations; 
(v) strengthening rural road asset management systems incorporating climate risks considerations; (vi) enhancing road 
safety on rural roads with particular consideration to vulnerable road users, including pedestrians and 2/3-wheelers, and 
(vii) institutional development activities including systems improvement. The rural roads to be financed under the Program 
will connect agriculture potential areas to markets. 
35. 
The total estimated cost of the RCAP is US$774.3 million, of which the World Bank will finance US$250 million 
with the balance coming from the Ministry of Finance Treasury allocations, regional and woreda contributions, and 
possibly other development partners (yet to be identified). The PforR operation will cover a period of five years to improve 
rural road network connectivity, access, safety, climate resilience, and quality of the rural road network. It will provide a 
better access for farm-based communities, rural villages, and pastoralist communities to all weather roads that reach 
market centers and different social and economic centers.  
 
The World Bank
 
Ethiopia Rural Connectivity for Food Security Program (P176303)
 
10 
 
36. 
The scope of the government RCAP and the scope of the PforR Program are presented in Table 2 below. 
Table 2: Government RCAP and PforR Scope 
 
Government RCAP  
PforR (IDA financing) 
Reasons for non-alignment  
Objective 
To interconnect rural 
communities as well as isolated 
areas to improve rural living 
standards by increasing 
accessibility to social and 
economic services  
To enhance climate 
resilience accessibility of 
target populations to 
food markets and 
services 
Objectives are aligned but formulations are 
different. Discussions during project preparation 
led to the adoption of the same objective.  
Duration  
2020-2030  
2024-2029 
Finances Phase 1 of the Program (2024-2029) 
Geographic 
coverage  
All the country  
Priority engagement is 
based on selection criteria 
Priority engagement for the World Bank 
resources not sufficient to cover the whole country 
Overall 
Financing  
US$774.3 million  
US$250 million  
It is a large national rural road program. In 
addition to World Bank financing, Ministry of 
Finance Treasury allocations, regional and woreda 
contributions, and possibly other development 
partners (yet to be identified) will participate. 
 
37. 
Financing Plan. The operation will be financed by an IDA grant in the amount of US$300 million (US$250 million 
for the PforR and US$50 million for the IPF component) along with counterpart funds from the Government amounting to 
US$107 million which are to be contributed by regional governments as matching funds. This total program financing plan 
of US$407 million will cover 52.6 percent of Government’s RCAP of US$774.3 million. 
Table 3. Operation Financing 
Source
Amount (US$, million)
% of Total
Counterpart Funding
107.00
26.29
Borrower/Recipient
107.00
26.29
International Development Association (IDA)
300.00
73.71
    PforR financing
250.00
61.42
    IPF financing
50.00
12.29
IDA Grant
300.00
73.71
Total Program Financing
407.00
100
 
IPF Windows   
38. 
The Investment Project Financing (IPF) will consist of two windows. 
Window 1: Piloting an E-market Platform (US$17.5 million) 
39. 
This window will complement the PforR financing to improve physical access to markets with digital solutions 
to further strengthen linkages between related market actors. Towards this end, window 1 of the IPF component will 
 
The World Bank
 
Ethiopia Rural Connectivity for Food Security Program (P176303)
 
11 
 
develop a comprehensive digital market platform that expands on current initiatives that are limited to dissemination of 
market information—by including information on agricultural inputs and on climate related market risks, and response and 
recovery frameworks, tracing the flow of both agricultural outputs and inputs as well as providing a platform to link farmers 
and small traders directly with buyers and to promote modern contract farming management—serving as a virtual market. 
40. 
Window 1 will have four components: (a) development of a digital market platform to link buyers directly to 
farmers and traders, (b) design and development of an agricultural output tracking system, (c) design and development 
of a contract farming management system, and (d) testing public-private partnerships for management of the platform.  
The major activities include: (a) design and development of a digital market linkage platform for agricultural inputs and 
output as well as its operationalization through various means including data collection, training, system deployment and 
digital kiosks; (b) design, development, and implementation of digital tracking system for agricultural output; (c) review of 
the existing contract farming management ecosystem and development of a workable digital solution; and (d) 
dissemination of tailored market information by creating comprehensive farmer profiles. 
Window 2: Capacity Building for Federal, Regional and Woreda Implementing Agencies and Support for Management 
of the Operation (US$32.5 million) 
41. 
This window will enable the Ministry of Urban and Infrastructure (MUI) to manage and coordinate the 
operation and to provide support to the regions and woredas in the implementation of the operation. It will provide 
funding for staff and associated costs for the Federal Project Coordinating Office (FPCO) as well as Regional Project 
Coordinating Offices (RPCO) based in the 13 regions of the country. It will also fund institutional and capacity development 
interventions, as well as road safety and gender interventions. 
D. Program Development Objectives (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators
42. 
The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance the climate resilient accessibility of target populations 
to food markets and services; and strengthen the institutional capacity for rural roads management.  
43. 
The PDO indicators are: 
 
Improved climate resilient and all-season connectivity assets constructed and operationalized: (a) Upgraded Rural 
Road Assets (Kilometer); (b) New Trail Bridge Assets (Number); and (c) New Special Structures (Number). 
 
Rural population that benefits from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services (Number, 
of which female). 
 
Enhanced readiness of Regional Roads Entities for initiating program implementation complying with minimum 
eligibility conditions (Number). 
 
44. 
The operation is anchored around three sets of key results areas converging the PforR and the IPF: (i) 
Institutional development and capacity building; (ii) Climate resilient rural accessibility; and (iii) Longevity and 
sustainability of investment. The investments under the IPF will strengthen food and agriculture markets and institutional 
capacity.  
E. Disbursement Linked Indicators and Verification Protocols
45. 
Type of indicators. The DLIs selected for the Program are mainly outcome level indicators but include some 
essential output indicators considering the infrastructure nature of the operation. The outputs involve km of roads and 
bridges that are constructed to climate resilient standards, implementation of rural road maintenance reducing 
vulnerability to climate risks and ensuring sustainable rural road assets and year-round connectivity. The outcome 
indicators measure improvements in beneficiaries accessing connectivity infrastructure and institutional strengthening 
aspects. Table 4 below summarizes the scope of the DLIs by results area and amounts to be disbursed. 
 
The World Bank
 
Ethiopia Rural Connectivity for Food Security Program (P176303)
 
12 
 
46. 
Disbursements under the Program will be triggered by the achievement of key results or disbursement linked 
indicators contributing to the PDO. Key considerations in DLI selection are: (i) signaling and monitoring critical milestones 
as well as outcomes for the achievement of the PDO; (ii) providing incentives to reward performance by ensuring 
transparency and economic efficiency; and (iii) addressing specific risks or constraints to achieving the results, including 
long-term sustainability of the Program and monitoring and evaluation. All contracts will be implemented in accordance 
with the country systems and processes, and will ensure after the technical, fiduciary and environment and social 
assessments that shortcomings are bridged through DLIs or Program Action Plans (PAP). An independent verification agent 
(IVA)24 will be contracted by MUI based on terms of reference to be developed and adopted by the recipient before 
effectiveness and agreed with the World Bank (as included in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) to be prepared and 
adopted by the recipient before effectiveness). The IVA will verify the results achieved on all the DLIs and will produce an 
assessment report that will be submitted simultaneously to MUI and the World Bank. The World Bank will conduct a Quality 
Assurance Review and share its findings with MUI. The Technical Committee and Steering Committee established by the 
Government as per the PIM will respectively review and approve the results verified by the IVA. MUI will submit the 
approved results together with a disbursement request for review by the World Bank which will retain the right to make 
final decision on whether a DLI has been achieved or not. 
Table 4. Disbursement Linked Indicators 
 
24 The first-year assessment of DLI 1 (the MACs) will be undertaken by MUI Department/Unit which is not Involved in Program operations, acceptable 
to the World Bank. The assessment of compliance during the subsequent years will be done as part of the Annual Performance Assessment by IVA. 
Results area
DLIs 
Amount 
 (US$ 
million) 
PforR 
(%) 
1. Institution 
Development 
and Capacity 
Building 
 
DLI-1: Enhanced Readiness of Regional Road Entities for initiating Program implementation
(Number) 
This DLI is non-scalable and will be met when participating Regional Road Entities achieve all five 
minimum eligibility conditions during the first year of the Program which are:  
(i) RRE has the Annual Budget for the Current Year (2024-25) (EFY 2017) with clear Matching 
Fund allocations for rural roads approved by the Regional Government; 
(ii)  All staff in critical positions in place including Management Head/ Deputy, Technical staff, 
Finance Specialist, Procurement Specialist, environment and social (E&S) Safeguards Specialist, 
and Monitoring Specialist.  
(iii)  The Regional Road Entities have assigned procurement staff- (with required qualifications, 
experience in works procurement) and prepared procurement plans, bidding documents 
including designs, posted open advertisement for all eligible national bidders, conducted bid 
evaluations based on standard templates and signed contracts with all procurement steps 
appropriately recorded;  
(iv)  Established a functional Environmental and Social Management System with adequate 
documentation and reporting.  
DLI1 will be assessed annually during all Program years, but payment will be affected only during 
the Program's first year. During subsequent years the Minimum Access Conditions (MACs) will 
be complied with by the Regions to be eligible to get assessed for other regional DLIs. RREs will 
meet DLI1 each subsequent year to be eligible for DLIs 2 to 7. 
62.5  
25  
 
The World Bank
 
Ethiopia Rural Connectivity for Food Security Program (P176303)
 
13 
 
Results area
DLIs 
Amount 
 (US$ 
million) 
PforR 
(%) 
DLI-2: Institutional strengthening of Woreda Roads Offices enhanced for implementing the 
Program (Number) 
The DLI is scalable and will be achieved when all the Woreda Road Offices under each RRE 
acquire and maintain the institutional capacity to perform their mandated technical facilitation 
roles in rural connectivity. The MAC will remain as a precondition for assessing achievements 
under this DLI throughout the Program period. RREs will develop and implement an annual 
Institution Development Plan (IDP), based on an internal assessment to enhance WROs’ capacity
on key thematic areas. The support areas include those demanded by the WROs and supply side 
priorities as decided by RREs. The support to the WRO includes provision of manuals, provision 
for system improvements, specific TA/mentoring support etc., while not duplicating the 
activities already covered under the IPF component. The steps in carrying out the capacity 
assessment, format for IDP, broader thematic areas of support, and format for reporting 
programs etc. are elaborated in the PIM.  
The prior result included in the DLI is Selection of Woredas by the Regions and an amount of 
US$2.00 million is earmarked. 
7.5 
3 
DLI-3: Improved procurement systems in place at Regional Road Entities with measurement 
and reporting of procurement and contract performance based on agreed Key Performance 
Indicators (KPIs) (Number).  
The DLI is non-scalable and will be achieved when Regional Road Entities that report 
procurement and contract performance on agreed KPI with the following minimum elements 
addressed: (i) share of different procurement methods, (ii) competitiveness (number of bidders),
(iii) timeliness of the procurement process, (iv) contract amounts with tracking of costs per km,
and (v) contract implementation performance by tracking cost and time overruns including 
names of contractors. All relevant data required for producing the KPI results will be regularly 
collected and analyzed for all procurements undertaken under each of the Regional Road 
Entities. The Regional Public Procurement Agencies (RPPAs) will timely carry out the audit of 
procurement and contract performance as per the KPIs and produce a report which will be 
submitted to the Regional Road Entities and the Regional Bureau of Transport, which will also 
provide copy of the report to MUI. The MAC will remain as a precondition for assessing 
achievements under this DLI throughout the Program period. 
3.75 
1.5 
2. Climate 
Resilient 
Rural 
Accessibility 
and Safety 
DLI-4: People that benefit from improved access to sustainable rural roads and connectivity 
services (Number) 
This DLI will be achieved when 11,356,191 people are newly accessing the connectivity assets, 
out of which 5,651,404 are women. The DLI is scalable and will be achieved when the 
commissioned rural roads, trail bridges, approach roads and other special structures provide 
accessibility to the targeted people. The annual assessment will be done of the completed and 
operationalized connectivity assets, considering the population of newly connected Kebeles, 
farm families in the agricultural potential areas connected, etc. The MAC will remain as a 
precondition for assessing achievements under this DLI throughout the Program period.    
 
22.5 
9 
DLI-5: Climate resilient and all-Season Connectivity assets operationalized (Length, Kilometer)
This DLI will be achieved when 7554 kilometers of rural roads, 373 trail bridges along with
pedestrian approach roads, and 750 special structures are constructed/ upgraded using climate 
resilient designs ensuring all season connectivity. The DLI is scalable, and assets completed as 
well as partially completed will be eligible for reporting achievement of DLI per Verification 
Protocol. For the partially completed assets the physical progress will be at least 20 percent. 
US$25 million upon achievement of initial 20 percent of physical progress of works, and 
thereafter US$25 million in tranches upon achievement of an additional 20 percent physical 
progress of works up to a maximum of US$125 million. 
125 
50 
 
The World Bank
 
Ethiopia Rural Connectivity for Food Security Program (P176303)
 
14

A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
47. 
The Program will be implemented through collaboration of diverse counterparts at the Federal, Regional, and 
Woreda levels, fostering both horizontal and vertical coordination to ensure a robust program delivery. These 
counterparts include the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Urban and Infrastructure, Ethiopian Roads Administration, 
Regional Roads Entities, and Woreda Road Offices. Program implementation will be anchored in multi-level 
implementation arrangements at Federal, Regional, and Woreda levels that will ensure Program oversight and 
coordination across sectors and different levels of government. MUI is the key oversight institution in charge of the 
Results area
DLIs 
Amount 
 (US$ 
million) 
PforR 
(%) 
Physical progress of works is defined as the sum of the payments made under the works 
contracts for the work done (excluding advances and claims) as per the schedule of payments in 
the bid document following the national system divided by the sum of the contract prices (the 
lumpsum contract price as mentioned in the contract agreements) of all the works. A 
comprehensive review will be carried out during the Annual Performance Assessment.  The 
review covers engineering designs prepared by the contractor and approved by the Supervision 
Consultant and its physical construction at site. The review also includes quality assurance, 
compliance with and implementation of Environmental and Social Management Plans, etc. The 
assessment will verify and certify that the DLIs have been fully or partially achieved. The MAC 
will remain as a precondition for assessing achievements under this DLI throughout the Program 
period. 
There are three prior results included in this DLI: 
(i) Establishing and empowering Steering Committees at Federal Regional levels- US$3.5 million.
(ii) Preparation of standard consultants and contractors’ selection documents to customize for
procurement of consultants and contractors by the RREs US$2.5 million. 
(iii) Reviewing and updating of Rural Road’s design manuals US$4.5 million. 
 
DLI-6: Enhanced safeguards compliance by Regional Road Authorities (including all Woredas
under them) as assessed through timely annual audits and safeguard reviews by Regional 
environmental regulatory authorities (Number) 
This DLI is non-scalable and will be achieved upon completion by the RREs and all Woredas under 
them of: 
(i) E&S screening based on the Environment and Social Management Guidelines (ESMG); 
(ii) Preparation of Environment and Social Management Plan(s) (ESMP)s / Environment and 
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA); 
(iii) Review and approval of ESMPs, screening reports by the regulatory agency; 
(iv) Documented evidence on the implementation of the ESMPs; 
(v) E&S considerations in the contract documents; and 
(vi) Annual E&S auditing by the regional EPA. 
The MAC will remain as a precondition for assessing achievements under this DLI throughout 
the Program period. 
3.75 
 
1.5 
3. Longevity 
and 
Sustainability 
of 
Investment 
DLI-7: Improved Woreda roads with assured and safe use (accessible and motorable during all 
seasons of the year) (Length, Kilometer)  
This DLI is scalable and will be achieved upon periodic maintenance of 10,000 km and accident 
data sharing to the RRE from the Accident Monitoring System. The MAC will remain as a 
precondition for assessing achievements under this DLI throughout the Program period. 
25 
10