[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 61610 chars (12.1% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

ANNEX 3: The Impact of Conflict and Climate in Ethiopia on Internal Displacement, 
Women, and Children ................................................................................................... 98 
ANNEX 4: Project Map ................................................................................................ 104 
 
 
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 1 of 104 
 
     
DATASHEET 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 
 BASIC INFO TABLE
Country(ies) 
Project Name 
Ethiopia 
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project 
Project ID 
Financing Instrument 
Environmental and Social Risk 
Classification 
Process 
P177233 
Investment Project 
Financing 
High 
Urgent Need or 
Capacity Constraints 
(FCC) 
 
Financing & Implementation Modalities 
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) 
[✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component  (CERC) 
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP) 
[✓] Fragile State(s) 
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) 
[  ] Small State(s) 
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) 
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country 
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee 
[✓] Conflict  
[  ] Deferred Drawdown 
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster 
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) 
[✓] Hands-on Enhanced Implementation Support (HEIS) 
 
Expected Approval Date 
Expected Closing Date 
31-Mar-2022 
31-Mar-2027 
Bank/IFC Collaboration    
No 
 
Proposed Development Objective(s)
 
To (i) rebuild and improve access to basic services and climate-resilient community infrastructure and (ii) improve 
access to multi-sectoral response services for Gender-Based Violence (GBV) survivors; in selected conflict-affected 
communities in Ethiopia. 
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 2 of 104 
 
 
Components
 
Component Name
Cost (US$, millions)
 
Rebuilding and Improving Access to Basic Services and Climate-resilient Community 
Infrastructure  
 210.00 
 
Improving Access to GBV Response Services  
  70.00 
 
Adaptive Project Management  
  20.00 
 
Contingent Emergency Response Component  
   0.00 
 
 
Organizations
 
Borrower: 
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Implementing Agency:
Ministry of Finance
 
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
 
SUMMARY-NewFin1
Total Project Cost 
300.00
Total Financing 
300.00
of which IBRD/IDA  
300.00
Financing Gap 
0.00
 
DETAILS-NewFinEnh1
World Bank Group Financing
     International Development Association (IDA) 
300.00
          IDA Grant 
300.00
  
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions)
 
Credit Amount 
Grant Amount 
Guarantee Amount 
Total Amount 
Ethiopia 
   0.00
 300.00 
   0.00
 300.00
National PBA 
   0.00
 300.00 
   0.00
 300.00
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 3 of 104 
 
Total 
   0.00
 300.00 
   0.00
 300.00
 
Expected Disbursements (in US$, Millions)
 
WB Fiscal Year  
 
 
 
 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
2027 
Annual 
 
 
 
 
  15.00 
 100.00 
 100.00 
  40.00 
  25.00 
  20.00 
Cumulative 
 
 
 
 
  15.00 
 115.00 
 215.00 
 255.00 
 280.00 
 300.00 
  
 
INSTITUTIONAL DATA 
 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Social Sustainability and Inclusion 
Fragile, Conflict & Violence 
 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 
 
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT) 
 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
 High 
 
2. Macroeconomic 
 High 
 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
 Moderate 
 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
 Substantial 
 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
 Substantial 
 
6. Fiduciary 
 High 
 
7. Environment and Social 
 High 
 
8. Stakeholders 
 Substantial 
 
9. Other 
 Substantial 
 
10. Overall 
 High 
 
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 4 of 104 
 
COMPLIANCE 
 
Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies? 
[  ] Yes      [✓] No 
 
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal 
E & S Standards 
Relevance 
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
Relevant 
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure 
Relevant 
Labor and Working Conditions 
Relevant 
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management 
Relevant 
Community Health and Safety 
Relevant 
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement 
Relevant 
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 
Resources 
Relevant 
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional 
Local Communities 
Relevant 
Cultural Heritage 
Relevant 
Financial Intermediaries 
Not Currently Relevant 
 
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential 
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review 
Summary (ESRS). 
 
Legal Covenants
  
 Sections and Description
Financing Agreement, Schedule 2, Section I.A.1. The Recipient, through the FSC, shall: (i) establish no later than 90 
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 5 of 104 
 
days after the Effective Date, Project steering committees at the regional levels; and (ii) designate the Woreda 
councils in participating Woredas to serve as the steering committees at the  Woreda levels, respectively. The 
Recipient  shall maintain at all times during the implementation of the Project, said steering committees to be 
responsible for, inter alia, providing guidance and oversight for the Project at the regional and Woreda levels, 
respectively. 
 
 Sections and Description
Financing Agreement, Schedule 2, Section 1.A.2. The Recipient, through the FPCU and in coordination with the 
participating regions, shall: (i) establish no later than 90 days after the Effective Date, and thereafter maintain at all 
times during the implementation of the Project, coordination units at the regional levels; and (ii) designate the 
Kebele Development Committees to serve as coordination units at the Kebele, Woreda and community levels, 
respectively. The coordination units shall be responsible for, inter alia, coordinating the implementation of Project 
activities at the regional, Kebele, Woreda and community levels, respectively, as further elaborated in the Project 
Operations Manual. 
 
 Sections and Description
Financing Agreement, Schedule 2, Section 1.B.2. The Recipient shall, not later than thirty (30) days after the 
Effective Date, (and thereafter by June 15 of each subsequent EFY) prepare and furnish to the Association, a work 
plan and budget containing all activities proposed for implementation in the following calendar year. The Work 
Plan and Budget shall ensure equitable allocation of funds to all regional states participating in the Project based on 
identified conflict impacts, including damages to public infrastructure and services as well as the hosting of 
Internally Displaced People. 
 
 Sections and Description
Financing Agreement, Schedule 2, Section 2.1.The Recipient shall furnish to the Association each Project Report not 
later than sixty (60) days after the end of each calendar semester, covering the calendar semester. 
 
 
Conditions
  
Type
Financing source
Description
Effectiveness
IBRD/IDA
Article IV 4.01. The Recipient has prepared and adopted a Project 
Operations Manual in accordance with the provisions of Section 
I.B.1 of Schedule 2 to this Agreement. 
 
Type
Financing source
Description
Effectiveness
IBRD/IDA
Article IV 4.01. The Recipient has established and operationalized 
the Federal Steering Committee in accordance with the provisions 
of Section I.A.1(a) of Schedule 2 to this Agreement. 
 
Type
Financing source
Description
Effectiveness
IBRD/IDA
Article IV 4.01. The Recipient has established and operationalized 
the core Federal Project Coordination Unit in accordance with the 
provisions of Section I.A.2(b) of Schedule 2 to this Agreement. 
 
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 6 of 104 
 
Type
Financing source
Description
Effectiveness
IBRD/IDA
Article IV 4.01. The Recipient has established and operationalized 
the core Federal Project Implementation Unit in accordance with 
the provisions of Section I.A.3(b) of Schedule 2 to this Agreement. 
 
Type
Financing source
Description
Effectiveness
IBRD/IDA
Article IV 4.01. The Recipient, through its Ministry of Finance and 
Ministry of Women and Social Affairs, has signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding in accordance with the provisions of Section I.B.3 of 
Schedule 2 to this Agreement. 
 
Type
Financing source
Description
Effectiveness
IBRD/IDA
Article IV 4.01. The Recipient has: (i) through its Ministry of Finance, 
contracted an implementing agency for activities under Part 1 of 
the Project in high risk of ongoing conflict areas; and (ii) through its 
Ministry of Women and Social Affairs, contracted an implementing 
agency for activities under Part 2 of the Project in high risk of 
ongoing conflict areas, all with terms of reference, mandates, 
staffing, and other resources satisfactory to the Association. 
 
Type
Financing source
Description
Disbursement
IBRD/IDA
Schedule 2, Section 3.B. No withdrawal shall be made under 
Categories (1) and (3), unless and until the Recipient has prepared, 
consulted, approved and disclosed an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework with respective annexes including a social 
assessment and social risk mitigation strategy; a sexual exploitation 
and abuse/sexual harassment prevention and response action plan; 
a Sub-Saharan African historically underserved traditional local 
communities assessment and plan; a security risk assessment and 
management plan; and labor management procedures, all in 
accordance with the provisions of the Environmental and Social 
Commitment Plan. 
 
Type
Financing source
Description
Disbursement
IBRD/IDA
Schedule 2, Section 3.B.  No withdrawal shall be made under 
Category (2), unless and until the Recipient has prepared, 
consulted, approved and disclosed a Resettlement Framework in 
accordance with the provisions of the Environmental and Social 
Commitment Plan. 
 
Type
Financing source
Description
Disbursement
IBRD/IDA
Schedule 2, Section 3.B.  No withdrawal shall be made for 
Emergency Expenditures under Category (4), unless and until all of 
the following conditions have been met in respect of said 
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 7 of 104 
 
expenditures: (i) (A) the Recipient has determined that an Eligible 
Crisis or Emergency has occurred, and has furnished to the 
Association a request to withdraw Financing amounts under 
Category; and (B) the Association has agreed with such 
determination, accepted said request and notified the Recipient 
thereof; and (ii) the Recipient has adopted the CERC Manual and 
Emergency Action Plan, in form and substance acceptable to the 
Association.   
 
 
 
     
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 8 of 104

A. Country Context
 
1. With a population of over 115 million people (2020), Ethiopia is the second most populous nation in Africa 
after Nigeria, and one of the most diverse. Ethiopia’s location in the center of the Horn of Africa and close to the 
Middle East and its markets gives it high strategic importance. It is physically connected to six other countries, namely 
Eritrea, Somalia, Kenya, South Sudan, Sudan, and, essential in terms of global trade, to Djibouti and its deep-sea port. 
Ethiopia hosts about 86 ethnic groups and 90 spoken languages and is also religiously and geographically diverse.1 
There are differences in the ethnic and religious composition as well as geographic and climatic characteristics 
between the highland and lowlands and within the subnational regional states.  
 
2. Despite its strong economic growth, Ethiopia remains one of the poorest countries in Africa, with an average 
per capita income of US$850 per year.2 Ethiopia’s economy experienced strong, broad-based growth averaging 9.4 
percent a year from 2010/11 to 2019/20. Its real gross domestic product growth slowed to 6.1 percent in 2019/20 
due to the Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19). Employment rates plunged in the early days of the pandemic, particularly 
in urban areas where the rate dropped from 80 percent before COVID-19 to 65 percent in April 2020, with changes 
noted more prominently in female-headed households. This, coupled with slow agricultural growth related to high 
levels of sensitivity and vulnerability of the agriculture sector to impacts of climate variability and change, is expected 
to lead to a rise in poverty.3 Projections based on a high-frequency phone survey results4 suggest that there were two 
million more poor in December 2020 compared to 2019. Though employment levels have been recovering, 
vulnerability is expected to remain high, resulting from the transition of many Ethiopians to fewer steady types of 
employment, such as self-employment, casual employment, and family work.5  
 
3. Ethiopia aims to reach a lower-middle-income status by 2025, and to reduce the poverty level to seven percent 
by 2029/30. To reach these goals, it has embarked on a series of reforms and accelerated investments. The 
Government of Ethiopia initiated in 2019 a comprehensive reform - the Homegrown Economic Reform Agenda - set 
to build upon the foundation laid by its second Growth and Transformation Plan (2016-2020) by outlining 
macroeconomic, structural, and sectoral reforms for job creation, poverty reduction, and inclusive growth. Among the 
key sets of reforms, the government proposes to introduce competition in key growth-enabling sectors, namely 
telecommunication, logistics, and energy, as part of an overall push to move from public to private sector-led growth. 
Ethiopia’s Ten-Year Plan (2021-2030)6 includes several strategic pillars, which, among others, focus on ensuring 
equitable economic growth, improving productivity and competitiveness across the economy, building a climate-
resilient green economy, building democratic and inclusive institutions, and ensuring equitable participation of 
women and children in society and the economy. These reforms have the potential to transform the economic, 
political, and climate vulnerability context in the country, as well as that of the Horn of Africa.7 The population’s 
 
1 According to Ethiopia’s 2007 Census.  
2 International Monetary Fund. 2021. Regional Economic Outlook. 
3 World Bank, 2021 and Miguel Sánchez-Martín, Samuel Mulugeta, Zerihun Getachew and Christina Wieser. 2020. Ensuring resilient recovery 
from Covid-19. Ethiopia Economic Update, Volume 8. Washington, D.C. 
4 World Bank. 2021. COVID-19 High Frequency Phone Survey of Households 2020.  
5 World Bank, 2021 and Miguel Sánchez-Martín, Samuel Mulugeta, Zerihun Getachew and Christina Wieser. 2020. Ensuring resilient recovery 
from Covid-19. Ethiopia Economic Update, Volume 8. Washington, D.C. 
6 Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Planning and Development Commission (now the Ministry of Planning and Development). 2020. Ten 
Years Development Plan: A Pathway to Prosperity, 2021-2030. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. The Ten-Year Plan includes the commitment (p.27) to 
reducing the poverty headcount ratio (at national poverty lines) to 7 percent of the population.  
7 World Bank in Ethiopia webpage, 2022. 
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 9 of 104 
 
expectations have been high as the government seeks to accommodate growth of the working-age population by 
roughly two million people per year.8 
 
4. While official data on national accounts for Fiscal Year 2021 (FY21) are yet to be released, economic growth is 
estimated to have significantly decelerated due to the ongoing armed conflict in the north and reduced access to 
essential services and infrastructure. Several intermediate indicators point to a slowdown: crop production during 
the main harvest season grew by only 2 percent in FY21 compared to 6.2 percent in FY209; electricity generation 
increased by only 2.2 percent down from 20.5 percent during the preceding year; and cement sales are estimated to 
have dropped by about three percent, as one of the main factories, located in the Tigray region, ceased activity. As 
the current account deficit widened during the first quarter of FY22 and donor financing dwindled, the government 
conducted a large drawdown of official reserves, which declined to official US$2.1 billion as of September 2021. 
Continued limited access to external financing sources coupled with lack of reprofiling of external debt service 
obligations pose significant risks to macroeconomic stability. Inflation went up significantly in 2021, mainly driven by 
high food prices. Worsening supply conditions in food markets due to the slowdown in production, disruptions in 
logistics and supply chains, and the persistent foreign exchange crunch were the main factors for the increase in 
inflation. In addition, conflict and uncertainty seem to have exacerbated expectations, driving inflation to over 30 
percent in recent months and heightening the volatility of the parallel market premium. Nominal annual depreciation 
accelerated from an average of about 6 percent for most of the past decade to 25 percent by the end of June 2021, 
but persistent high inflation has hampered efforts to achieve real exchange rate depreciation.10 This macroeconomic 
pressure has led to significant impacts on communities and households. In combination with damages reported 
throughout conflict-affected areas on local basic infrastructure11, it has reduced the government’s ability to provide 
basic services to communities, leading to a medium-term decline in development opportunities, for example, because 
of reduced educational outcomes. At the household level, real-term income losses have had negative impacts on 
development trajectories. In turn, the deceleration in economic growth may fuel further social tensions and political 
risks, above all in situations where conflict reasons are mutually attributed. As such, recovery activities have the 
potential to address medium-term threats to development and reduce conflict risk levels. 
 
5. Ethiopia faces significant challenges due to climate change. Average temperatures in Ethiopia have increased by 
an average of 1°C since 1960s, resulting in increased evapotranspiration and reduced soil moisture. The incidence of 
drought has increased and the rains in the central and northern areas occurring in February to May have become less 
predictable. Increased temperatures are expected for East Africa and specifically for Ethiopia, with mean monthly 
temperature changes expected to increase by 1.8°C by the 2050s and by 3.7°C by end of the century under a high-
emission scenario. Projected precipitation trends indicate as much as a 20 percent decline in spring and summer 
rainfall in southern and central regions and an increase in southwest and southeast areas. Projected warming trends 
 
8 Ronnas and Aditya Sarkar. 2019. An Incomplete Transformation: SDG-8, Structural Change, and Full and Productive Employment in Ethiopia. 
ILO/SIDA Partnership on Employment – Working Paper No. 3. Geneva: International Labor Office.  
9 Agricultural production in the Amhara and Afar regions is expected to have been disrupted since the spread of the conflict in these two 
regions coincided with the farming and planting period of the meher season. According to the Ministry of Agriculture, 41 million quintals of 
crop (about 12 percent of FY21 meher grain production) are estimated to have been damaged in the Amhara region alone due to the conflict. 
Production of sesame –a major export commodity – is the most affected as 70 percent of production comes from areas affected by the 
conflict. 
10 World Bank in Ethiopia webpage, 2022. 
11 The Federal Government is commencing a nationwide damage assessment extending from the ongoing conflict in the north. During project 
preparation, several regional governments presented preliminary numbers outlining damages in the range of tens of billions of Ethiopian birr 
on infrastructure and equipment in relation to schools, health posts, agricultural centers, and others throughout the country. The MoF 
announced on December 30, 2021, that it is seeking 122 billion birr to help finance reconstruction efforts. 
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 10 of 104 
 
for the entire country are expected to exacerbate observed declines in rainfall, leading to increased water stress.12 
With more frequent and severe droughts, the country is likely to experience negative impacts on water supply, 
biodiversity, and hydropower generation. A potential simultaneous increase in floods poses a serious water pollution 
threat, affecting health of wetland and forest ecosystems, which provide critical services for communities in Ethiopia.13 
Displaced people are on the frontlines of the climate emergency, with many living in areas that lack the resources to 
adapt to an increasingly hostile climate, such as the selected project regions of Afar, Amhara, Benishangul-Gumuz, 
Oromia, and Tigray.  
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
6. In recent years, existing conflict drivers have re-surfaced and new conflicts have emerged in Ethiopia. Incidences 
of violent conflict have increased sharply in the last five years in both rural and urban areas across the country.14 Some 
of these conflicts have had long histories, for example, between different ethnic groups over control of climate-
sensitive local resources such as water or pasture. Historically, these resource conflicts had been closely connected to 
competition, especially in Ethiopia’s lowland regions,15 but were exacerbated during the political transition due to 
intensification of political competition and rivalry between elites at the local, national, and regional levels. Analyses 
show a complex conflict system interweaving old and new grievances, local and national politics, neglect, frustration 
of the younger generation, climate change and land degradation, rural-urban migration, and other factors, with a 
history of conflicts being framed in ethnic terms. 16 Figure 1 presents the number of incidents of political violence in 
recent years and Box 1 presents further information on conflict drivers in Ethiopia. 
 
12 Ministry of Environment and Forest. 2015. Ethiopia’s Second National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC). The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. 
13 CGIAR. 2018. Climate Resilient Green Economy Strategy. Sector-wise GTP II Implementation Monitoring Checklist. CGIAR Research Program 
on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS), East Africa. 
14 Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project. 2021. 2021 Conflict Dimensions in Ethiopia. 
15 World Bank and U.K. Department of International Development. 2019. Poverty and Vulnerability in the Ethiopian Lowlands: Building a More 
Resilient Future. Washington, D.C.  
16 World Bank. 2020. Inclusive Development in Local Areas of Violence and IDP Hosting Areas: Risks and Opportunities. Washington, D.C. See 
also Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project. 2021. 2021 Conflict Dimensions in Ethiopia; Stockholm International Peace Research 
Institute, 2020, Ethiopia’s Transition: Implications for the Horn of Africa and Red Sea Region, SIPRI Insights on Peace and Security No. 2020/5. 
Stockholm: SIPRI.  
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 11 of 104 
 
 
Figure 1: Incidents of Political Violence in Ethiopia  
 
Source: The Armed Conflict and Location and Event Data Project (https://acleddata.com/)17 
 
 
17 The data for 2021 are incomplete. 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 12 of 104 
 
 
7. Climate change is widely recognized as a “threat multiplier” due to its role in exacerbating conflict. Impacts of 
climate variability and change, including warming, changes in precipitation, and increasing frequency and intensity of 
climate-related hazards like flooding and drought, alter competition over increasingly scarce and climate-sensitive 
natural resources. Climate-fueled plagues of locusts and the devastating health and economic impacts of COVID-19 
are added stress factors to an institutional system under reform. Enhancing people’s ability to adapt to climate change 
could, therefore, contribute to reduction in conflict and enhance economic and political stability.  
 
8. The conflicts in Ethiopia have resulted in humanitarian crises, leading to destruction of private and public assets 
and a need for immediate support for local communities. The United Nations Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs (UN-OCHA) estimates that more than 5.2 million people have significant humanitarian needs as 
a result of the fighting in Northern Ethiopia alone with further substantial needs throughout other conflict-affected 
Box 1. Drivers of Conflict in Ethiopia 
The incidences of conflicts in Ethiopia are highly context-specific and diverse. At the national level, conflict increased prior 
to the transition in 2018 before subsiding, and then increased again after the Northern Ethiopian Crisis broke out in 
November 2020 (see Figure 1 for graphic presentation of recent conflict incidence). However, a focus on the overall levels 
of conflict at the national level would conceal significant regional variance, with conflict concentrated along internal and 
international borders and in states where non-state armed groups are in conflict with the Federal Government.  
 
Recent conflicts in Ethiopia can be differentiated into three types:  
 
(i) 
Regional conflicts: Ethiopia is affected by the continued instability in Sudan, South Sudan, and Somalia, which 
affects border regions, especially due to the inward movement of refugees. Tensions with Sudan over the 
disputed al-Fashaga region have also affected Ethiopia, notably parts of the Amhara region, since December 
2020; while the peace agreement after a decade-long conflict with Eritrea has seen domestic opposition in the 
Tigray region.  
(ii) 
Conflicts between armed groups and the Federal Government: Political conflict continues to affect parts of the 
Afar, Amhara, and Tigray regions (the Northern Ethiopian Crisis), Central and Western Oromia region, as well 
as the Benishangul-Gumuz region with involvement of non-state armed groups and Federal authorities. 
(iii) 
Local conflicts: Inter-communal violence has been witnessed in parts of the Southern Nations, Nationalities 
and People’s Region (SNNP) region, the Benishangul-Gumuz region, the Oromia region, and, recently, in the 
Afar region and in Western Tigray region. These localized conflicts have largely been over access to climate 
sensitive natural resources, which have been increasingly impacted by the effects of climate variability and 
change, and related grievances, including questions on land and land use rights. Some of them have long 
histories, such as conflicts between some Somali and Oromo communities, but they have become intertwined 
with conflicts around the delineation of administrative boundaries of regional states, Districts (Woredas), and 
Wards (Kebeles). As such, these conflicts involve a variety of stakeholders, including local security forces, 
leading to disputes between regional administrations.  
 
While some conflict drivers are more prominent than others in different parts of the country, in many places the layers of 
contributing factors and conflict fault lines overlap, creating a complex web of stakeholders, alliances, and interactions, 
which materialize differently in each locality.  
 
Sources: Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project. 2021. Conflict Dimensions in Ethiopia; and Tobias Hagmann and Mustafe 
Mohamed Abdi. 2020. Inter-ethnic Violence in Ethiopia’s Somali Regional State, 2017 - 2018. Conflict Research Programme Policy 
Memo. Conflict Research Programme, London School of Economics and Political Science, London, UK. 
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 13 of 104 
 
areas of the country in the Oromia, Benishangul-Gumuz,18 Gambella, the SNNP, and Somali regions.19 Most concerning 
is the acute food insecurity that exists within these areas.20 The cascading effects of conflict, including reduced 
productivity, population displacements, movement restrictions, limited humanitarian access, slow relief efforts, 
ongoing insecurity due to a number of formal and informal armed groups, and loss of livelihood assets, disrupt the 
country’s economic system. Continued fighting could also impact regional and global supply chains as was the case in 
the past, including by affecting essential import and export along the Addis Ababa-Djibouti Road corridor. The fighting 
could also continue to disrupt domestic transport networks that are essential for agricultural produce to reach 
domestic and export destinations. These disruptions and the direct risks for productive facilities disincentivize 
investments. Given the close political, economic, and security linkages between Ethiopia and the surrounding 
neighbors, there remains a risk of spillover effects into other parts of Africa. 
 
9. Public infrastructure in conflict-affected communities has been destroyed or degraded due to the direct effects 
of conflict or from being used for humanitarian purposes. Economic infrastructure, including coffee pulping plants, 
livestock breeding centers, agriculture nurseries, and model farmers display centers, have been destroyed, as have 
health posts, health centers, school buildings, markets, and farmer training centers.21,22 Indirect impacts on public 
infrastructure include those related to ad hoc solutions for internally displaced persons (IDPs). In some areas (notably 
in the Oromia, SNNP, and Somali regions), schools, market buildings, abattoirs, and parks have been used to 
temporarily house IDPs, resulting in the degradation of these facilities. In some schools, benches and tables were used 
as cooking fuel, leaving these schools nonfunctional. While Ethiopia has made much progress extending access to 
water supply, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services, decreased availability and/or compromised quality of surface 
water supply has heightened the vulnerability of people depending on these sources for daily activities. More intense 
and frequent storms and flooding may cause storm water flows, which increase the likelihood of water contamination 
of both surface sources and shallow wells. This is a serious adverse impact as people rely heavily on surface water 
when wells dry up. Increased temperatures and intense rainfall are putting greater pressure on the water and 
sanitation sector, with potential to further impact development gains.23 
 
10. Conflict, impacts from climate variability and climate change, and associated humanitarian crises have led to 
large-scale internal displacement, particularly after 2016.24 Data from the International Organization for Migration 
(IOM) from September 2021 (the latest available data) indicate that there are 4.23 million IDPs in Ethiopia, constituting 
one of the largest IDP populations in the world. Just over 50 percent of IDPs are female, while at least 720,000 children 
have been displaced.25,26 The vast majority of IDPs (85 percent) has been displaced by conflict, while other main causes 
of displacement are climate-induced, namely drought (7 percent) and seasonal floods (3 percent). More minor causes 
are also climate-induced, namely flash floods, landslides, swampy lands, and strong winds. Notably, there are regional 
differences between the proportion of IDPs displaced by conflict and those displaced because of other reasons, 
including climate-related disasters. About 40 percent of the IDPs in the country are in a state of protracted 
displacement (displaced for more than five years) and the remaining 60 percent have been displaced within the last 
five years. Fifty percent of all IDPs (about 2.08 million people) have been displaced within the last six to seven 
 
18 UN-OCHA. 2021. Humanitarian Needs Overview: Ethiopia.  
19 UN-OCHA. 2021. Northern Ethiopia Humanitarian Update: Situation Report. Published 30 December 2021.  
20 According to the June 2021 Integrated Food Security Phase Classification assessment, which projects results up to September 2021.  
21 World Bank. 2020. Inclusive Development in Local Areas of Violence and IDP Hosting Areas: Risks and Opportunities. Washington, D.C.  
22 Aditya Sarkar, Alfredo Manfredini Böhm, Fasil Mulatu Gessese, Moti Mosisa Gutema. 2021. Responding to internal displacement to urban 
areas in Ethiopia: could the urban safety net help? Washington, D.C.  
23 The World Bank Group. 2021. Climate Risk Profile: Ethiopia. 
24 Yearly breakdown of internal displacement trends available at: Ethiopia: Country Information, Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre.  
25 IOM. 2021. Ethiopia National Displacement Report 10 (August-September 2021), published 13 December 2021. 
26  https://www.unicef.org/press-releases/children-northern-ethiopia-dire-need-protection-and-assistance.  
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 14 of 104 
 
months.27 Nearly 90 percent of the IDPs in Ethiopia are in the Tigray Region (over 1.8 million people), the Somali Region 
(about 900,000 people), the Oromia Region (about 500,000 people), and the Amhara Region (about 350,000 people). 
These numbers are likely higher as IOM data do not cover IDPs who are not located in identifiable IDP settlements, 
and some parts of Ethiopia (notably the Tigray, parts of Western Oromia, and Benishangul-Gumuz regions) – among 
the most affected by conflict – have not been fully accessible for data collection.  
 
11. The primary factors impeding IDP return include the lack of access to basic infrastructure and services.28 A study 
commissioned by the World Bank in 2020 on the drivers of internal displacement and its impacts on development 
projects29 noted critical conflict impacts and climate-related hazards to water and sanitation services, access to 
education, and infrastructure. Water sources (including potable water sources) have been destroyed in several 
conflict-affected Woredas. This is particularly challenging given the drought-prone nature of many Woredas, with 
projections indicating that climate change will further increase the frequency and severity of drought. Even though 
some have since been restored, many post conflict areas and IDP settlements remain dependent on water supply by 
mobile tankers, with budgetary impacts on already stretched local government budgets. These impacts on water and 
sanitation have affected mostly women and children who bear the disproportionate burden and added insecurity of 
traveling long distances to fetch water. In the education sector, there has been a disruption to the teaching and 
learning process in all areas affected by conflict because of damage to school buildings and associated facilities. Access 
to basic services and infrastructure are important factors to support the resilience of communities to effectively 
manage shocks in the present and adapt to changing climatic conditions over time; thus, the lack of access to these 
services further increases the vulnerability of conflict-affected communities to future shocks and stresses – including, 
but not limited, to climate change. 
 
12. Protection challenges in Ethiopia are generally pronounced, and gender-based violence (GBV) presents a 
significant barrier to women’s full engagement in social and economic life. The Government of Ethiopia’s 2016 
Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey indicates that 26 percent of all women aged 15 to 49 reported having 
experienced physical or sexual violence in their lifetime, with 23 percent reporting physical violence and 10 percent 
experiencing sexual violence.30 These data, however, likely belie the full extent of the challenge. A survey conducted 
by the UN Population Fund (UNFPA) in 2010 among youths between the ages 12 and 24 in select regions indicates 
that GBV prevalence may be even higher31, with 15 percent of young women reporting having experienced sexual 
violence in their lifetime.32 Experience of intimate partner violence is particularly pronounced; more than one third of 
women (34 percent) have experienced some form of spousal violence – physical, sexual, or emotional. The survey 
found that acceptability of use of violence at home was high, with 63 percent of women and 27.6 percent of men 
believing that wife beating was justified for at least one specified reason.33 Help seeking behavior of GBV survivors 
was found to be limited – only 23 percent of women who experienced physical and/or sexual violence sought help, 
while 66 percent of women never sought help nor told anyone about their experience. As in other countries, fear of 
stigmatization, retaliation, and rejection likely impede women from reporting experiences of violence or seeking care. 
Harmful practices persist in Ethiopia, with 65 percent of women having experienced some form of female genital 
 
27 IOM estimates that there were 2,091,387 IDPs in Ethiopia in December 2020/January 2021 (as reported in its Ethiopia National 
Displacement Report 7) and noted that there were 4,239,636 IDPs in Ethiopia in September 2021 (as reported in its Ethiopia National 
Displacement Report 10, which is the most recent data available).  
28 Ibid. 
29 World Bank. 2020. Inclusive Development in Local Areas of Violence and IDP Hosting Areas: Risks and Opportunities. Washington, D.C. 
Mimeo.  
30 https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR328/FR328.pdf. 
31 Survey locations included the Addis Ababa, Afar, Amhara, Benishangul-Gumuz, Oromia, and SNNPR regions. 
32 Population Council and UNFPA, 2010. The age of the survey also highlights the lack of data in this area.  
33 Ethiopia Central Statistical Agency. 2017. Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey 2016. Addis Ababa.  
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 15 of 104 
 
mutilation/cutting and four in 10 women married before their eighteenth birthday.34,35 Girls living in rural and poor 
areas or in households with lower levels of education are at a particularly high risk in this regard. 36  
 
13. Recent conditions and compounding risks related to conflict and displacement, worsened by climate change, 
have exacerbated the incidence of GBV, including widespread reports of physical and sexual violence. The 
November 2021 report of the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission (EHRC) and the OHCHR on human rights violations 
and abuses extending from the conflict in the Tigray Region found that GBV—including varying forms of physical and 
sexual assault, such as rape and gang rape, abduction, detention, and intentional transmission of HIV—has been a 
prominent feature of the recent violence, committed by all parties to the conflict.37 The government has since 
established a task force to address the report’s recommendations. Other reports estimate that more than 100 cases 
of sexual violence were reported daily between November 2020 and July 2021, while health facilities in the Tigray 
Region registered nearly 1,300 cases of rape between February and April 2021.38,39 Displaced women and girls are 
further vulnerable to other forms of GBV, including harassment and separation from families; and while conflict-
related sexual violence has predominantly affected women and girls, including women and girls with disabilities, men 
and boys have been targeted as well.40 Women and girls are disproportionately vulnerable to the impacts of both 
climate change and conflict, the effects of which often compound one another, increasing the incidence of GBV. 
Experiencing GBV, in turn, reduces victims’ capacity to effectively prepare for and manage any future shocks and 
stresses, climate-related or otherwise.  
 
14. Access to health, social welfare, and judicial services for GBV survivors nationally and in conflict-affected 
regions is a challenge, and quality response services 

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

ted communities more 
broadly. The provision of mobile health services in the Tigray region by international partners and the regional health 
bureau seems to have provided positive yields in general health support, but it has not been adequately strong to 
provide more complex services beyond immediate referral, such as services related to GBV and MHPSS. There are, 
however, plans to expand these services, including by adding social workers to the mobile clinics. See further details 
on the impacts of conflict and climate in Ethiopia on internal displacement, women, and children in Annex 3. 
 
 
34 Ibid. 
35 The prevalence of child marriage in Ethiopia is higher than both the regional average for Eastern and Southern Africa (35 percent) and the 
global average (21 percent). United Nations Children’s Fund, Ending Child Marriage: A profile of progress in Ethiopia, UNICEF, New York, 2018. 
36 United Nations Children’s Fund, Ending Child Marriage: A profile of progress in Ethiopia, UNICEF, New York, 2018. 
37 EHRC and OHCHR. 2021. Report of the EHRC/ OHCHR Joint Investigation into Alleged Violations of International Human Rights, Humanitarian 
and Refugee Law Committed by all Parties. Published 3 November 2021.  
38 UN-OCHA. 2021. Ethiopia – Tigray Region Humanitarian Update. Published 19 July 2021.   
39 https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2021/08/ethiopia-troops-and-militia-rape-abduct-women-and-girls-in-tigray-conflict-new-
report/.  
40 UN-OCHA. 2021. Ethiopia – Tigray Region Humanitarian Update. Published 19 July 2021.   
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 16 of 104 
 
15. Regional authorities, Woredas, and Kebeles play a critical role in supporting conflict-affected communities. 
Issues of regional peace and security, conflict, and displacement usually fall first within the realm of regional security 
agencies, or regional disaster risk management (DRM) bureaus in the case of displacement and climate-related 
disasters. Further, local authorities have played a critical role in responding to the initial phases of displacement, 
although their approach has seen criticism for privileging return and relocation as the solution to internal displacement 
without allowing IDPs to make adequate free and informed choices.41 Some regions – notably the Oromia and Somali 
regions – have also increased their capacity in responding to displacement, though implementation has remained 
uneven due to limited resource availability. In 2018-2019, for instance, the regional bureaus aimed to help IDPs to 
either integrate within areas where they were living, relocate to other Woredas, or return to their areas of origin. 
Funding for such activities has also been limited and implementation has been sporadic, above all, after the outbreak 
of the COVID-19 pandemic. As such, it is important to augment the capacity of local government entities to ensure 
effective engagement while strengthening the oversight functions of Federal institutions. Notably, local government 
entities, being part of the political (and thus conflict) system, may fail to address, and perhaps exacerbate, conflicts, 
warranting close monitoring systems of local level engagements. 
 
16. Several ministries and agencies are engaged in addressing the multiple challenges posed by the conflict and 
evolving humanitarian emergency and urgent needs, albeit with resource, institutional, and data constraints. A 
Federal multi-sectoral recovery office is being established, chaired by the Ministry of Finance (MoF), and 
encompassing relevant line ministries (such as education, health, planning, water and energy, women and social 
affairs, and urban and infrastructure) and other relevant Federal entities. The entity will be mandated to coordinate 
funding for rehabilitation activities coming from the Federal budget, development partners, the private sector, and 
individual contributions of Ethiopian, including the diaspora. The recovery office will complement humanitarian 
actions coordinated by the Ministry of Peace (MoP) and the Ethiopian Disaster Risk Management Commission 
(EDRMC) under the Prime Minister’s Office.42 The institutional response to internal displacement has several 
challenges, including resource constraints and varying capacity levels of responsible agencies at all levels. Together 
with development partners, including the UN and the World Bank, the Government is also planning to develop a larger 
Post-conflict Impact Assessment and Recovery and Reconstruction Plan to identify more clearly needs and investment 
priorities to enhance and broaden reconstruction and recovery efforts. 
 
17. Several international commitments and government policies and laws govern the IDP response in Ethiopia; 
however, actions have been hampered by multiple institutional challenges. Commitments include the 2009 African 
Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa (the ‘Kampala 
Convention’), which the government signed and ratified in February and March 2020, respectively, and the Durable 
Solutions Initiative for Internally Displaced Persons (DSI), which the government launched in 2019.43 Ethiopia also 
completed in 2019 its National Adaptation Plan, which provides an overarching framework for its response to the 
impacts of climate change, mirroring the National Adaptation Plan Process as established under the UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. Policies and laws include the National Policy and Strategy on Disaster Risk 
Management (NDRM Policy, 2013), the National Social Protection Policy (NSPP, 2014) and a National Social Protection 
 
41 Protection Cluster Ethiopia. 2019. Returns of Internally Displaced People in Ethiopia.  
42 The EDRMC is responsible for coordinating humanitarian activities in Ethiopia through the Federal-level DRM – Technical Working Group 
and by coordinating the work of humanitarian ‘clusters’ - working groups on humanitarian issues. 
43 The DSI is informed by the 2010 UN Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement and the 2010 Inter-Agency Standing Committee Framework 
on Durable Solutions for Internally Displaced Persons. The DSI was prepared jointly by the government and development partners and 
presented in December 2019. The DSI provides a principled operational framework and a platform to design and implement durable solutions 
in support of IDPs and host communities/communities at locations of return, relocation, or local integration in Ethiopia. It aims at facilitating 
collective action and cooperation between the Ethiopian government authorities at national, regional, and local levels and the international 
community. 
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 17 of 104 
 
Strategy (2016). The NDRM Policy remains the overarching policy framework that guides the response to the internal 
displacement crisis, while the NSPP and National Social Protection Strategy are relevant to the inclusion of IDPs in 
Ethiopia’s social protection systems.  
 
18. The government has created a conducive legal and policy environment to promote the rights of women and 
girls; however, implementation remains a challenge. In 2000 and 2005, Ethiopia adopted the Revised Family Law and 
the Revised Criminal Code, respectively. Other national instruments with provisions directly related to GBV include 
the Strategic Plan for an Integrated and Multi-Sectoral Response to Violence Against Women and Children and Child 
Justice in Ethiopia (2010) and the National Strategy and Action Plan on Harmful Traditional Practices Against Women 
and Children (2013). The newly merged Ministry of Women and Social Affairs (MoWSA) maintains a coordination, 
policy, and advocacy mandate for GBV prevention and response, and for abuse involving children. The Attorney 
General’s Office, through a multi-sector steering committee – the National Coordinating Body on a Coordinated and 
Comprehensive Prevention and Response to Violence against Women and Children, and on Child Justice – manages 
and coordinates the provision of core services through OSCs, such as counseling, medical treatment, free legal aid, 
and survivor safety. OSCs further support judicial processes that bring perpetrators to justice. The Ministry of Health 
(MoH) provides medical services and emergency medications to survivors through the OSCs and through the health 
sector more generally. The Ministry of Education has been active in developing policies, procedures, and codes of 
conduct to tackle GBV in schools. Despite these progressive laws and policies, enactment and implementation remain 
a challenge, particularly at local levels, due, in part, to insufficient resources and poor coordination and action, as well 
as sensitivities and silence around the issue, which enable continued perpetration of violence.  
 
19. The Government of Ethiopia and the international community have been supporting displaced people and GBV 
survivors primarily through humanitarian support. The EDRMC is responsible for coordinating humanitarian activities 
by leading a Federal DRM Technical Working Group and overseeing several specialized task forces that work jointly 
with lead international and national government and nongovernment agencies. This joint support has facilitated 
distribution of food and other essential materials, camp coordination and shelter response, and protection monitoring 
for IDPs. It has also built capacities of, and delivered technical assistance to local and regional governments, increasing 
access to documentation for IDPs, housing recovery, and support to livelihoods and employment through the 
promotion of small enterprises, particularly for women and youth. While immediate support has focused on short-
term humanitarian crisis management, the Government of Ethiopia, along with international and national partners, is 
working to facilitate a shift to longer-term development and planning for future risks. Critical coordination 
mechanisms for humanitarian response to GBV include Government efforts in coordination with the GBV and Child 
Protection Sub-Clusters, which aim to ensure that protection and assistance services to children and women affected 
by violence are efficiently and timely delivered through interventions by relevant government and nongovernment 
partners. In coordination with MoWSA, the GBV and Child Protection Sub-Clusters are led by the UN Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF, for child protection) and UNFPA (for GBV), while membership further includes the DRM Food Security Sector; 
UN agencies; international nongovernment organizations (NGOs); Civil Society Organizations (CSOs); and bilateral 
partners. Coordination for the Prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse Network – a critical forum for agencies 
engaged in preventing and mitigating risks of sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) in development and humanitarian 
operations- is co-chaired by UN Women and a World Food Program set up under the auspices of the Inter-Agency 
Standing Committee and involves various UN and national partners.  
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives
 
20. The Response-Recovery-Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (3R-4-CACE Project) is 
aligned with the World Bank Group FY18-22 Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Ethiopia, discussed by the 
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 18 of 104 
 
Board of Executive Directors on June 27, 201744 Focus Area 2: Building Resilience and Inclusiveness, in particular 
Objective 2.6: Increased Access to Services and Job Opportunities for Refugees and Hosting Communities and 
Objective 2.7: 2.7 Enhanced management of natural resources and climate risks. The CPF specifically notes that 
Ethiopia has a high number of IDPs and commits to working with development partners to support the government 
in its committed policy shift of moving people from encampment to gradual socioeconomic inclusion, as well as 
supporting expanded access to basic services for displaced and host communities.  
 
21.  The project is aligned with the World Bank Group Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV) Strategy for 2020-
202545, whose objective is to support countries in addressing the drivers and impacts of FCV and strengthening their 
resilience, especially for the most vulnerable and marginalized people. The project is primarily addressing the impacts 
of the conflict between armed groups and the Federal Government (the type ii conflict driver noted in Box 1); however, 
given the overlap in the conflict contributing factors in many parts of Ethiopia, it is expected that the project will also 
address the impacts of regional and local conflict drivers (types i and iii). Specifically, the project supports two of the 
Strategy’s four pillars: Pillar 2: Remaining Engaged during Conflicts and Crisis Situations, by building and protecting 
essential institutions and services in areas with high prevalence of IDPs and delivering critical services to IDPs and host 
communities; and Pillar 4: Mitigating the spillovers of FCV, by addressing key issues related to internal displacement. 
Both the FCV Strategy and the ongoing IDA19 place a strong focus on the nexus between FCV and climate change. The 
project addresses this nexus by strengthening community and Federal institutions’ capacity to respond to the impacts 
of conflict and enhance resilience, ensuring that communities affected by conflict are more resilient to climate change; 
and by financing community infrastructure that meets communities’ needs and is resilient to the impacts of climate 
change. 
  
22. The project is aligned with the World Bank Group Gender Strategy for 2016-23.46 The strategy places a strong 
focus on gender equality in fragile and conflict-affected situations, stating that violent conflict and fragility affect men 
and women in differentiated ways that are seldom recognized or addressed in mainstream conflict and reconstruction 
programs and projects. Specifically, the project will support the Strategy’s Strategic Objective 1: Improving Human 
Endowments, by increasing displacement-affected women’s access to health services, enhancing the skills and 
availability of frontline health workers, investing in education facilities for boys and girls, and enhancing social 
protection and safety nets for IDPs; Strategic Objective 2: Removing Constraints for More and Better jobs, by 
increasing women’s access to essential services and infrastructure that enhance their mobility, among others; and 
Strategic Objective 4: Enhancing Women’s Voice and Agency and Engaging Men and Boys, by addressing protection 
challenges, in particular impacts of GBV, and adopting gender transformative interventions that address social norms 
and behaviors that condone and drive perpetration of violence.  
 
23. The project is aligned with the World Bank Group Approach to COVID-19 Crisis Response and Recovery (‘COVID-
19 Approach Paper’).47 Under the Response stream, the project will support emergency response to health threats, 
including those posed by COVID-19, and their immediate social, economic, and financial impacts through mobile 
health services for conflict-affected communities in selected Woredas. Under the Recovery stream, the project will 
help rebuild health systems and services and essential community infrastructure. Under the Resilience stream, the 
project will invest in institutions, community education, and policies/operating procedures to build a more 
sustainable, inclusive, and resilient future for conflict-affected communities in Ethiopia.  
 
44 Report No. 119576-ET. 
45 Report No. 146551. 
46 World Bank Group. 2015. World Bank Group Gender Strategy (FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction, and Inclusive Growth. World 
Bank, Washington, D.C. 
47 Report No. 150916; June 2020. 
The World Bank
Response - Recovery - Resilience for Conflict-Affected Communities in Ethiopia Project (P177233) 
 
 
 
   
 
Page 19 of 104 
 
 
24. The project supports the World Bank Group Climate Change Action Plan48 and the concept of “Building-Back-
Better”. The project will boost support for climate change adaptation and mitigation through resilience-building in 
conflict-affected communities, which are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. The project is 
expected to generate climate co-benefits since it will invest more than half of its IDA resources in building or rebuilding 
community infrastructure in a way that emits less carbon and is more resilient to the impacts of climate change, 
achieving resilience through stronger and more inclusive reconstruction efforts. The project also supports the World 
Bank Group’s Action Plan on Climate Change, Adaptation, and Resilience49 and its focus on scaling up support to social 
resilience, in particular for the most vulnerable, and the priority area to better understand and act on the potential 
impact of climate change in FCV situations. The Building-Back-Better concept will be adopted for conflict-affected 
communities by making sure that new or improved services and infrastructure are more resilient to climate change 
and that the recovery process is inclusive of all conflict-affected community groups, including the most vulnerable 
groups.  
 
25. The project supports the Government of Ethiopia’s Ten-Year Development Plan for 2021-2030.50 Under Strategic 
Pillar 8: Increasing Social Inclusion, the Ten-Year Plan includes provisions to reduce sexual violence against women, 
create conditions to ensure that women are free from physical and mental violence, and increase the economic 
participation of women and youth. Strategic Pillar 8 will be supported by empowering and enabling women, youth, 
and vulnerable people to benefit from economic development through equitable participation in project interventions 
as well as specific activities to address GBV-related targets. Under Strategic Pillar 10: Peace Building, the Plan outlines 
necessary measures to ensure sustainable peace, enforce the rule of law, and strengthen social institutions. Strategic 
Pillar 10 will be supported through investments in rapid response basic services in communities; re/building of host 
community infrastructure and services; and enhancing Federal and local institutions for improved service delivery, 
emergency response, and effective social inclusion mechanisms. The Plan’s cross-sectoral objective of building 
infrastructure and services that are resilient to climate change will also be strongly supported by the project.

A. Project Development Objective
Project Development Objective 
 
26. The PDO is to (i) rebuild and improve access to basic services and climate-resilient community infrastructure and 
(ii) improve access to multi-sectoral response services for Gender-Based Violence (GBV) survivors; in selected conflict-
affected communities in Ethiopia. 
PDO Level Results Indicators 
 
27. The following PDO-level Indicators will be used to measure the achievement of the PDO:  
 
a) Beneficiaries with rebuilt and improved access to climate-resilient community infrastructure (Number, 
disaggregated by gender and displacement status)  
 
48 World Bank Group. 2021. Climate Change Action Plan 2021-2025: Supporting Green, Resilient, and Inclusive Development. Washington, D.C.  
49 World Bank. 2019. The World Bank Group Action Plan on Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience. Washington, D.C. Report No. 136368. 
50 Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Planning and Development Commission (now the Ministry of Planning and Development). 2020. 
Ten Years Development Plan: A Pathway to Prosperity, 2021-2030. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.