[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 55818 chars (20.3% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
 
1. 
Ethiopia, one of the fastest growing economies in Africa, aims to reach lower-middle-income status by 2025.  
Although still one of the poorest countries in the world, with a per capita gross national income of US$1,020, Ethiopia 
has made significant strides in poverty reduction, with the national poverty rate decreasing from 30.8 percent to 25.1 
percent between 2009/10 and 2018/19.1 However, growth has since slowed to 6.4 percent in 2021/22 which could also 
arrest recent progress in poverty reduction.  
 
2. 
The progress made in growth and poverty reduction is at risk due to multiple shocks, including the impact of 
internal, regional and global conflicts, frequent natural disasters, and the COVID-19 pandemic. Ethiopia is emerging 
from one of the most devastating periods of internal conflict in the recent history of the country. The conflict that began 
in November 2020 led to a significant loss of life, left 9.4 million people in dire need of humanitarian assistance, and 
triggered an ongoing displacement crisis with an estimated 4.39 million internally displaced persons (IDP).2 The 
magnitude of estimated household income losses in conflict-affected woredas suggests that the conflict could have 
pushed as many as 3 million people into poverty. Although a peace agreement was reached between the Government of 
Ethiopia (GoE) and the regional party of Tigray on November 2, 2022, continued scattered conflict within some regions 
of the country continues to displace populations and disrupt economic activity and delivery of basic services.  In addition, 
instability in the region, specifically the ongoing conflict in Sudan has led to an influx of refugees putting additional 
pressure on the country. At the same time, the impact of global challenges on food, fuel, and fertilizer prices is reducing 
the fiscal space for investments in basic services. These multiple shocks have not only acted as an exogenous shock on 
the economy, disrupting the overall economic activity across the country and accentuating existing macroeconomic 
imbalances but is also impacting the ability of the Government to invest in human capital formation which would have 
long-term impact on the country’s growth and poverty reduction prospects.  
 
3. 
Weak capacity to adapt to frequent climate shocks is also contributing to increased vulnerability to income 
losses, unemployment, and food security, and can exacerbate existing inequalities in the country, particularly 
impacting rural areas. The country is at high risk of natural disasters such as flooding and drought, and the high levels of 
poverty and dependence on key sectors that are highly affected by climate change (such as agriculture, water, tourism, 
and forestry) further exacerbate this vulnerability.3 In 2022, almost 12 million people were in need of food assistance as 
a result of droughts from five consecutive failed rainy seasons.4 In the same year, floods displaced more than half a million 
Ethiopians and destroyed over 110 schools.5 The climate crisis is expected to reduce Ethiopia’s GDP by 10 percent by 
2045.6 It is important to build resilience to frequent climate shocks through diversifying job sources and skills for 
adaptation and climate change mitigation. 
  
4. 
The COVID-19 crisis has highlighted the extent of the country’s vulnerability, particularly among poor and urban 
populations. Employment rates plunged in the early days of the pandemic, particularly in urban areas, with changes 
noted more prominently in female-headed households. Estimates suggest that the rate of poverty has increased by 33.2 
 
1 World Bank. Macro Poverty Outlook for Ethiopia: April 2023 (English). Macro Poverty Outlook (MPO) Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.  
2 International Organization for Migration. Ethiopia – National Displacement Report 16 (November 2022 – June 2023). August 21, 2023. 
3 The World Bank. Climate Change Knowledge Portal 
4 World Food Programme. Ethiopia Annual Country Report 2022. 
5 Ethiopia Country Climate Development Report, 2023, draft World Bank 
6  World Bank. Climate Risk Profile – Ethiopia 2020. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Education and Skills for Employability Project (P177881) 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 48  
     
 
percent in urban areas since 2018/19, compared to an increase of 9.4 percent in rural areas over the same period.7 Phone 
survey data suggest that firm revenues were significantly depressed, and at the household level, nearly a quarter of 
surveyed households reported their income either declined or completely disappeared.8 These effects are closely linked 
to the low skill profile of the Ethiopian labor force and to the structure of its economy and labor markets. The pandemic 
disproportionately affected the lowest productivity sectors, had a particularly pernicious effect on self-employed and 
low-skilled workers, and has negatively affected the sectoral reallocation of labor during the recovery phase.  
 
5. 
Ethiopia’s Ten-Year Development Plan (2021- 2030), based on its 2019 Home-Grown Economic Reform Agenda, 
aims to accelerate growth by enhancing productivity and competitiveness and diversifying the economy. The Plan 
articulates priority sectors to drive growth of the economy including agriculture, manufacturing, mining, tourism, and 
information and communication technology (ICT).9 Ensuring that the labor market possesses the skills required to meet 
the needs of these priority sectors is foundational to achieving the growth aspirations of the country and will require 
significant investments. The Government is also expected to launch a revised Homegrown Economic Reform Program 
(“2.0”), which will set out an agenda to reduce macroeconomic imbalances, remove exchange rate and other market 
distortions, and advance much-needed structural reforms to increase Ethiopia’s long term economic growth potential. A 
strong focus on protecting the poorest from potential adjustment costs is critical to ensure that reforms are effective and 
sustainable.10 These economic prospects will, in turn, offset some of the existing vulnerabilities, building stronger 
foundations for peace, stability, and security.  
 
6. 
Despite the recent headwinds impeding progress, Ethiopia, the second most populous country in Sub-Saharan 
Africa, is well placed to reap a high demographic dividend and build resilience with investments in its human capital. 
More than 30 percent of the population is between the ages of 7 and 19; and more than a quarter of the population is 
between the ages of 15 and 29. The school-age cohort of an estimated 37.8 million school-age children and adolescents 
(ages 7–19 years) in 2022 is expected to increase to over 43 million by 2030.11 It will be important to base economic 
growth drivers around this young population base. However, Ethiopia’s human development outcomes are among the 
lowest in the world. It scores 0.38 on the World Bank’s Human Capital Index (HCI), placing it in the bottom 21 of the 174 
countries included in the HCI (2020) globally.  
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
7. 
Harnessing the potential of Ethiopia’s young population will be critical for the country to achieve its growth and 
economic transformation aspirations. The labor market in Ethiopia is experiencing strong demographic pressure with 
more than 2 million youth12 entering the labor market every year. However, inactivity and unemployment among 
Ethiopia’s youth has become a major policy concern over the past decade. Unemployment rates are rising across the 
country, with the burden falling disproportionally on the youth: Between 2013 and 2021, the unemployment rate 
increased from 7 to 12 percent for those aged 15-24 and doubled from 5 to 10 percent for those aged 25-34. This 
challenge will likely only increase in severity: Between 2020 and 2050, the number of youth aged 15 – 29 is expected to 
increase from 34 million to almost 54 million.13 Nineteen percent of youth are not in employment, education, or training 
 
7 Wieser et al. 2021 and Ambel et al. 2021 and World Bank estimates based on the High-Frequency Phone survey (HFPS) of households. 
8 Phone Survey Data: Monitoring COVID-19 Impact on Firms and Households in Ethiopia. World Bank, 2020.  
9 Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, 2021  
10 World Bank. MPO for Ethiopia: April 2023 (English). MPO Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.  
11 Authors’ calculation using World Population Prospects 2022 Data: Medium-Fertility Variant, 2022 – 2100 
12 Ethiopia's National Youth Policy (2004) defines youth as those between the ages of 15 and 29.  
13 Labor Force Survey 2021 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Education and Skills for Employability Project (P177881) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 48  
     
 
(NEET) with significantly higher rates among young women (28 vs 10 percent for men). There is strong evidence indicating 
that disadvantaged youth run the risk of continuous labor and social exclusion if they are not able to improve their 
employability by acquiring skills and work experience at a crucial time when they should be accumulated. 
 
8. 
Providing market-relevant skills to the large cohort of Ethiopian youth will be essential to achieving the 
economic vision of the Government. As Ethiopia’s economic priorities evolve, there is a mismatch between workers’ 
skills and industry needs. In order to achieve growth and transformation in priority sectors, firms seek hard skills related 
to production, processing, management, and service delivery, as well as soft skills such as good communication, 
responsiveness, time management, and teamwork – all of which are seen as increasing workers’ employability and labor 
productivity and thereby the overall productivity of the company.14 Despite substantial progress made on increasing 
overall access to education, shortages of both hard and soft skills remain. In 2019, 29 percent of youth, compared to 27 
percent of all wage workers, were employed in jobs belonging to the lowest skills category (skill level 1) typically requiring 
the performance of simple and routine physical or manual tasks. More than a quarter of secondary school graduates 
were employed at skill level 1 - with some training, they could be better equipped to contribute more productively to the 
economy. At the same time, nearly 40 percent of primary graduates are performing jobs at higher skill levels for which 
they need training to become productive, highlighting the large skills deficit in the labor market.  
 
9. 
Skills in Ethiopia command a higher wage premium than most developing countries. The average wage 
differential between skilled and unskilled labor in Ethiopia is 81 percent. At the same time, Ethiopia’s labor productivity 
is significantly below peer countries and that productivity gap has widened over time. In 2018, the labor productivity of 
competitor countries Myanmar, Vietnam, Cambodia, and Tanzania was respectively 3.4, 2.9, 1.7, and 1.6 times higher 
than in Ethiopia.15 There is strong evidence in Ethiopia that improving skills of its workforce would not only benefit 
individuals by improving their income levels, but also lead to improved productivity which could contribute to growth. 
Since the largest share of unemployed youth are those who have not had schooling opportunities, investments are 
needed in making non-formal and short-term courses more available and accessible. Overall, only six percent of the 
Ethiopian population (10 years and above),16 has received some kind of training with the vast majority in urban areas (75 
percent).17 
 
10. 
Women are less likely to participate in the labor market and training, with worsening trends observed in the 
recent years in unemployment, NEET, and labor force participation rates. Nearly one in three women are NEET, with 
the rate increased by 13 percentage points between 2013 and 2021.18 The underutilized potential of women in the labor 
market is linked to the lack of opportunities in jobs and education. Only 36 percent of the population who have received 
any training are women.19 There is strong evidence associating women’s ability to develop their full labor market 
potential and earn and control income with contributions to poverty-reduction and broader development.20 Addressing 
the existing gender gaps in education and labor market outcomes will require deliberate actions in technical and soft 
skills, areas of literacy, and overarching factors such as safety. 
 
11. 
Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) is a key component of the Government’s strategy to 
 
14 International Labor Organization. 2022. National TVET policies and systems in Ethiopia: Opportunities and issues in challenging times. 
15 Ethiopia Productivity Report, 2020. Policy Studies Institute, National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies.  
16 As defined in the Ethiopia Labor Force Survey 2021, a person is considered trained if they pass any short or long-term skill/ability development-
training program, given in or outside classroom, in theory or in practice or both, and that resulted in award of a certificate. 
17 Ethiopia Labor Force Survey, 2021. 
18 Ibid. 
19 Ibid. 
20 Heintz, J., 2006. Globalization, Economic Policy and Employment: Poverty and Gender Implications, International Labour Organization, Geneva. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Education and Skills for Employability Project (P177881) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 48  
     
 
improve labor productivity, reduce unemployment, and sustain growth. In Ethiopia, TVET is seen as an integral part of 
the solution to bridging the skills gaps by improving technical, managerial, and entrepreneurial skills to meet the changing 
skills needs of the economy as reflected in its 10-Year Development Plan (2020-2030). It is viewed as a key mechanism 
for providing youth with relevant skills to increase both waged and self-employment. To meet the goals of addressing 
skills mismatches, the Ministry of Labor and Skills (MoLS) was established in 2021 as part of the overall restructuring of 
the Government. MoLS brings under its umbrella the mandates for labor, employment, and skills, providing an 
opportunity to effectively bring together key players to ensure a cohesive approach to addressing skills for jobs. MoLS is 
responsible for labor market demand analysis, development of occupational standards (OS) in line with the TVET national 
qualification framework and the design of the national TVET policy and strategy. At the regional level, Regional Labor and 
Skills Bureaus in eleven regional states and two administrative cities have the responsibility for overseeing the public 
TVET institutions, regulating private TVET institutions, accreditation, teacher training programs, implementing jobs, labor, 
and skills related directives of MoLS and collaborating with the relevant economic and social sectors to facilitate a 
conducive environment for the labor market and employment activities within each state across the country. Public TVET 
institutions have academic and administrative autonomy to design new programs, revise curricula based on OS 
developed by MoLS, generate/use income and run the institutions. Quality assurance of TVET is the responsibility of the 
newly established Education and Training Authority which reports to the Ministry of Education. Although there is a clear 
policy priority to improve the access, quality, equity, and relevance of TVET programs, achieving these goals will require 
significant investments.    
 
12. 
TVET institutions have seen a significant expansion over the past decade. There are close to 1,600 TVET providers 
in Ethiopia (up from 582 in 2017)21, of which half are privately owned (52.3 percent). Private TVET providers focus mostly 
on relatively less capital-intensive programs that are highly demanded in the market like business, health, and ICT 
programs. On the other hand, publicly run TVET institutions offer more technical programs that require greater 
infrastructure, machinery and laboratories. It will be important to leverage the large number of private providers to 
increase training opportunities for youth and also to ensure that the training they offer leads to jobs. 
 
13. 
Although enrollment in TVET has grown rapidly, skills levels of the labor force fall far short of requirements. In 
a span of four years between 2016 and 2020, enrollment in the formal TVET institutions increased from 238,584 to 
478,874. Public TVET institutions enrolled 60 percent of the total trainees and the remaining trainees were enrolled in 
private (20 percent) and non-governmental organizations (NGO) (20 percent) run TVET institutions.  The increase in 
enrollment, however, falls short of the Education Sector Development Program V target (achievement was 85 percent of 
target). Enrollment of female students in the formal TVET programs accounts for half of total enrollment. However, more 
female students are enrolled in lower level TVET programs (levels I and II) than higher level programs (levels IV and V), 
and in terms of choice of programs female students are less likely to be enrolled in programs with higher employment 
and income potential like manufacturing, automobile, construction etc. This is reflected in the higher share of women in 
employment that is at a lower skill level. 
 
14. 
Limited participation of enterprises/employers in TVET leadership leads to supply-driven training provision. To 
offer relevant and market-demanded skills, active participation of employers will be critical. A clear role for employers in 
the decision-making of TVET institutions around program selection, development of curricula, definition of OS, practical 
training of instructors, provision of cooperative training models,22 and industry-led certification of skills, will be essential 
for increasing the relevance of skills development in the country and improving employability of its graduates.  
 
21 International Labor Organization. 2022. National TVET policies and systems in Ethiopia: Opportunities and issues in challenging times. 
22 Cooperative training model refers to learning taking place in an integrated manner at two locations: in an enterprise (practical training on the 
job) and in a technical training institution (basic and theory training). Also called dual training model.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Education and Skills for Employability Project (P177881) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 48  
     
 
15. 
TVET institutions suffer from low quality due to outdated curricula and limited teacher competency. TVET 
curricula utilized in training are not developed in accordance with OS and do not meet the required standards due to the 
absence of alignment and/or mismatch between the existing OS and the practices of the local industry. There are 
significant instructor competency gaps. TVET teachers are recruited directly from university, where they acquire a 
theoretical background but no vocational pedagogy or industry experience. Consequently, teachers lack both industry 
and teaching experience. In addition, training focuses mainly on theory as opposed to practical training due to lack of 
equipment and weak linkages with industry. At the same time, facilities of some polytechnic colleges (PTCs), specifically 
those located in areas impacted by conflict have been severely damaged.   
 
16. 
System-level issues hindering the ability of TVET providers to respond to labor market needs include limited 
data, coordination, and information sharing. There is inadequate data collected on the demand and supply of skills 
through labor market assessments. Without this information, training providers are unable to make effective decisions 
about training programs to offer. Second, data on the employment outcomes of training providers are not readily 
available. This information will be critical for the Government to hold training providers accountable for results and help 
youth decide which training programs to pursue. Third, coordination mechanisms to connect employers, the public sector 
and training providers are needed to ensure a dynamic skills development system that adjusts quickly to supply skills 
demanded by employers. Lastly, a strong policy and legal framework for formally engaging with employers would create 
the enabling environment for more active participation of employers in the skills development system.  
 
17. 
The GoE is prioritizing investments in public PTC to improve their relevance and quality and partnering with the 
private sector to expand access to high-quality training opportunities for youth. To meet the goals of its 10-year 
Development Plan, Ethiopia recently updated its Education and Training Policy which was endorsed by parliament in 
February 2023. The overarching purpose of the policy is to produce competent graduates equipped with the 21st century 
skills that respond to the demands of the industry. It emphasizes an equitable and inclusive TVET system that partners 
with the private sector to offer high quality training opportunities to youth. The policy also emphasizes the need to invest 
in PTCs to create flexible training programs in collaboration with industry, professional associations, employers' union 
and TVET trainers. Further, it highlights the need to invest in teacher quality including through partnerships with industry 
to provide opportunities for practical training for TVET teachers. 
 
18. 
Short-term skills programs are a potentially promising model for countries that, in a context of fewer job 
opportunities and a changing labor market, are looking to skill their labor force. The provision of short-term skills is one 
of the most important labor market pathways for increasing the number of youth who will not be able to complete 
education or continue towards higher education. A core challenge in this regard is that most institutions have a limited 
understanding of the needs of the labor market, and, as a result, there is often a mismatch between labor market needs 
and the skills with which trainees graduate. Addressing this issue requires closer linkages between the training providers 
and the labor market and industries. Such linkages will enable providers to tailor-make their programs to meet the 
demand in the labor market.  
 
19. 
Ethiopia is committed to building a climate-resilient green economy. While transitioning to a green economy 
may disrupt labor markets over the next decade, it will also create significant new job opportunities. Investments in the 
green transition, broader application of Environmental, Social and Governance standards and climate-change adaptation 
are expected to have strong positive impacts on job creation with the highest net expectations for job growth in Sub-
Saharan Africa (around 64 percent of companies expecting job growth less those expecting job decline).23 It will be critical 
to prepare the labor market in Ethiopia with the skills needed to support the transition toward a green economy.  
 
23 World Economic Forum, Future of Jobs Report. 2023. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Education and Skills for Employability Project (P177881) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 48  
     
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
 
20. 
The Project focuses on practical, work-related skills to enhance employability of youth in Ethiopia while 
addressing skills constraints to respond and adapt to megatrends. The Project is expected to help Ethiopia meet the 
Sustainable Development Goal of “promoting sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive 
employment and decent work for all.” It is in line with the IDA20 Special Themes of Human Capital, Jobs and Economic 
Transformation, Gender and Development and Fragility, Conflict and Violence. The Project is also well aligned with the 
World Bank’s AFE Priorities with its focus on skills for jobs, digital skills, green skills and importantly investing in people 
which also has the potential of addressing drivers of fragility, conflict and violence.  
 
21. 
The proposed Project is consistent with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY2018-
2022 discussed by the Board on June 27, 2017 (Report No. 119576-ET) and the new CPF under preparation.24 The CPF 
recognizes that low skills levels of workers pose limits on job growth in Ethiopia. It also acknowledges labor market 
frictions in the intermediation between supply and demand for jobs. The Project is also aligned with the Gender and 
Jobs corporate priority areas as it aims to increase women’s skills and access to jobs. The Project incorporates lessons 
from the literature on women’s economic empowerment, which recognizes that building skills, addressing early 
marriage, and incorporating knowledge on rights promotes women’s economic empowerment.  
 
22. 
The proposed Project also complements the government priorities in the skills development sector. The 
proposed Project supports MoLS’s TVET strategic shift to integrate technology, enhance gender-sensitive training 
provision, promote green programs, and ensure more competent, demand-driven skills training programs. The proposed 
Project also aims to support the Government’s strategy of providing labor market responsive short-term training to 
produce a competent workforce. It is fully aligned with the Government’s approach of strengthening linkages with 
employers to reduce skills mismatches and ensure proficiency in soft, technical, and ICT-based skill sets. The proposed 
Project also complements the Government’s initiative to promote increased female participation in a broad range of 
training opportunities to enable more young women to gain decent jobs.  
 
23. 
The Project is aligned with Ethiopia’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) submitted to the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, which commits to reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 
68.8 percent by 2030. Eighty percent of this commitment is conditional on the support of the international community. 
Ethiopia updated its NDC in 2021 building on its 10-year Development Plan which includes building a climate resilient 
green economy as one its strategic pillars. The greening of the economy necessitates a concomitant greening of 
employment, which in turn necessitates green skills availability in the labor market and TVET to deliver those skills. The 
Project contributes directly to providing the labor market with the knowledge, skills, and behaviors needed to transform 
workplaces and communities in line with the greening initiatives of the GoE. The Project is also consistent with the 
country’s National Adaptation Plan (2019) which includes expanding environmental education and awareness as a key 
adaptation measure. Lastly, the Project is fully aligned with Ethiopia’s Long-term Low Emissions and Climate Resilient 
Development Strategy (2020-2050) which recognizes the role that women, youth, and vulnerable communities play in 
climate action, and in alignment with national sustainable development policies, aims to maximize opportunities for 
gender and social inclusion outcomes. The Project puts special emphasis on providing women and disadvantaged youth 
with the skills needed for productive employment, specifically in occupations that support the transition to a green, 
resilient economy.  
 
24 World Bank (2017), Ethiopia Country Partnership Framework for the period FY18–FY22 (Report No. 115135-ET) (World Bank, Washington, 
DC)   
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Education and Skills for Employability Project (P177881) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 48

A. Project Development Objective 
PDO Statement 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve employment outcomes of the TVET system of Ethiopia with a focus 
on women and marginalized groups. 
 
 Marginalized groups refers to IDPs and persons with disabilities (PWDs). 
 
PDO Level Indicators 
The PDO will be measured by the following indicators: 
 
• 
Employment rates of graduates of project-supported training programs (percentage of employed/self-
employed within 6-12 months of completion of training), disaggregated by gender, IDPs and persons with 
disabilities  
• 
Number of students who successfully complete project-supported training programs, disaggregated by 
gender, rural, IDPs, PWDs and green skills. 
• 
Number of Sector Skills Councils (SSCs) established. 
 
B. Project Components 
 
24. 
The proposed Project will support Ethiopia to strengthen its TVET system to equip its youth with labor market 
demanded skills to improve their employment prospects. It aims to achieve this through (i) transforming selected public 
PTCs to offer high-quality, relevant skills in partnership with enterprises; (ii) short-term training of youth through 
performance-based contracting of public and private training providers; and (iii) addressing information gaps and 
improving coordination of stakeholders in the TVET sector. Component 1 supports mainly formal training programs which 
are currently mostly offered by public training providers in Ethiopia. Component 2 aims to leverage the private sector to 
meet the skills needs of youth through short term training programs to help them gain employability in the short term. 
Together these complementary approaches aim to meet the diverse needs of both employers and youth seeking 
employment.  
 
25. 
The Project focuses on skills development opportunities for women and vulnerable and marginalized groups, 
including IDPs and PWDs. Training opportunities will be made available to youth ranging from secondary school dropouts 
to university graduates who are not currently employed to enable them to attain skills that lead to jobs.  Several design 
elements address constraints faced by women in acquiring skills that lead to productive jobs. In addition, incentives for 
enrolling disadvantaged communities such as the large numbers of IDPs who are escaping conflict in the country have 
been integrated in project design. Because IDPs are usually not able to choose their locations based on host community 
labor market needs, there is a higher likelihood of skills mismatch. Training programs to reskill IDPs in areas relevant for 
their new locations can contribute to their productive employment. Specifically, qualitative and descriptive evaluations 
show positive results for ICT skills such as coding.  
 
26. 
Many jobs in Ethiopia today, and those in the future, will require a combination of problem-solving, and critical 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Education and Skills for Employability Project (P177881) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 48  
     
 
thinking as well as soft skills and basic digital skills in addition to technical skills.25 The Project will focus on these core 
sets of skills alongside technical knowledge in all the training programs it supports. In addition, Ethiopia’s TVET strategy 
puts emphasis on building entrepreneurship skills as an important avenue to enterprise development and job creation. 
To support this goal, the Project will support mainstreaming of entrepreneurship training in PTCs that the project 
supports. Lastly, there will be a special focus on green skills that could generate climate co-benefits, through training in 
areas such as renewable energy, eco-tourism, and improved energy and water use for agriculture.  
 
Component 1: Strengthening public polytechnics for improved labor market outcomes (US$110 million equivalent) 
 
27. 
Component 1 will strengthen selected PTCs to produce high-quality skilled graduates that meet the industry's 
needs in priority sectors of the economy. The PTCs have been selected following transparent criteria which consider 
geographical coverage and labor market relevance. At least one PTC has been selected in each region to ensure national 
coverage. The PTCs will develop strategic investment plans (SIPs) in close collaboration with industry/employers to 
upgrade their institutes as comprehensive training hubs offering, in conjunction with surrounding enterprises, formal 
TVET alongside needs-based short duration reskilling and upskilling training programs that respond closely to market 
demand to enhance enrollment while improving the employability of trainees. The development and implementation of 
the SIPs, which provide a blueprint for upgrading the PTCs to Centers of Excellence, will be approved by the Project 
Steering Committee (PSC) and financed by the Project. Each SIP includes targets for the various areas for improvement 
described below which will be tracked during project implementation to measure impact of the investment. 
 
28. The SIPs focus on:  
• Strengthening governance and management of the PTCs. Industry Advisory Boards (IABs) with participation of 
industry local to the PTC will be established as part of the SIPs to advise on improving relevance of program offerings, 
availing opportunities for staff industry attachment, student placement and assessment. IABs will be responsible for 
establishing partnerships with local industry to establish cooperative training programs for students and foster 
employment opportunities of PTC graduates. Specifically, they will include incentives for private sector engagement 
in the SIPs. The number of partnerships with employers forged will be tracked to monitor performance.  
• Introducing training programs that meet the needs of the industry. Based on the national OS developed in close 
consultation with relevant industries, the PTCs will design highly demanded programs or update existing programs 
to meet the growing needs of the industry, with a focus on the priority sectors. PTCs will forge partnerships with 
other regional and international training institutions in their targeted sectors, through twinning arrangements for 
instance, to develop high quality training programs. Specific emphasis will be placed on developing industry-certified 
digital skills programs for which demand has been established and green skills programs that support the green 
transition of the economy such as, renewable energy, climate-smart agriculture, waste management, environmental 
sustainability, eco-tourism, etc. Existing curricula will be updated to include modules focusing on soft skills training 
including on communication, problem-solving etc.26 In addition, environmental protection and climate related issues 
will be introduced in all curricula to enhance climate and disaster risk adaptability knowledge and awareness 
building for all beneficiary groups on the dynamics, effects and mitigation strategies related to climate change. 
• Entrepreneurship training. Given the high level of informality in Ethiopia and the importance of self-employment 
for creation of jobs in the Ethiopian labor market, each SIP will include establishment/strengthening of an 
Entrepreneurship program in the supported PTCs. The programs will prepare students for successful self-
employment or for managing a small business. Topics related to climate change will be included in all 
 
25 World Development Report, The Changing Nature of Work, World Bank, 2019 
26 Integration of foundational transversal competencies into technical subjects has been successfully implemented in Vietnam and will 
provide lessons for implementation in Ethiopia.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Education and Skills for Employability Project (P177881) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 48  
     
 
entrepreneurship training to understand climate change, the risks associated with it and the steps that will need to 
be taken to mitigate these risks. Lessons from implementation of the Educate! Program focused on employability 
and entrepreneurship implemented in Uganda, Rw

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

and equipment: Existing facilities will be refurbished with a special focus on 
ensuring the facilities provide safe and conducive environments for female students, including separate water, 
sanitation and hygiene (WASH) facilities. The refurbishment will leverage the use of energy-efficient technologies 
to reduce GHG emissions where possible, utilizing, for example, energy-saving measures such as solar systems and 
energy-saving bulbs, as well as rainwater harvesting to support water conservation. The facilities will be equipped 
with modern technologies that will transform teaching at the polytechnics. The PTCs will be upgraded to combine 
technological tools such as virtual reality, augmented reality, and other immersive technologies, to provide students 
with hands-on and engaging experiences, and practical exercises that allow multiple repetitions without posing 
additional risks in various fields. In addition, use of technology is expected to mitigate climate risk by promoting 
resilience of the TVET system in the face of disruption due to natural and manmade disasters. PTCs will be 
supported28 to design college-specific technology solutions that improve the quality of the programs and transform 
the learning experience of learners to prepare them for the future of work. The interventions designed will be 
included in the SIPs and implemented with support from the Project. Further, emphasis will be placed on (1) 
increasing private sector inputs when procuring new materials and equipment to ensure they reflect the state of 
the art; (2) partnerships with the private sector to allow for use of equipment after hours, or at least observing use 
during work times, and to secure equipment donations, particularly when large firms, foreign or domestic, are 
making new investments; and (3) increased emphasis on cooperative training that can reduce institutional 
infrastructure and equipment needs. 
• Interventions for female trainees. SIPs include special interventions for women to enroll in non-traditional courses. 
Although there is gender parity in TVET enrollments in Ethiopia, women have significantly worse employment and 
earnings outcomes. This is consistent with global evidence which shows that gender segregation in TVET fields of 
study matters for future earnings. Evidence from Uganda shows that women who cross over into male-dominated 
sectors make as much as men and three times more than women who stay in female-dominated sectors.29 In 
Ethiopia, a similar study of entrepreneurs also found significant profit gaps along the same divisions.30 Evidence 
 
27 BRAC. 2018. Propensity Score Matching End of Course Evaluation Report.  
28 The World Bank has received a US$150,000 grant from the Master Card Foundation which will be used to provide this technical support 
to the selected PTCs.  
29 “Breaking the Metal Ceiling: Female Entrepreneurs Who Succeed in Male-Dominated Sectors.” Policy Research Working Paper No. 
7503. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
30 2015. “Female Entrepreneurs Who Succeed in Male-Dominated Sectors in Ethiopia.” Gender Innovation Lab Policy Brief No. 12. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Education and Skills for Employability Project (P177881) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 48  
     
 
shows that lack of information and networks are a main constraint.31 To address this, the SIPs will include 
interventions to (i) share information with female youth on profitability of business sectors and encourage more 
women to enter higher-return male-dominated sectors; and (ii) create linkages with lending initiatives such as 
Women Entrepreneurship Development Project (WEDP; P122764) which support female entrepreneurs.  
• Tracer studies. Each PTC will conduct tracer studies annually to track the employment outcomes of their students. 
This information will be critical for PTC level decision-making on the types of training programs to offer to improve 
overall employment outcomes and the need for forging partnerships with potential employers. These studies will 
also be helpful in identifying constraints faced by particular groups of students in gaining employment, for instance, 
women, so that these can be addressed in a systematic manner.  
• Facilitate outreach and support for non-project TVET institutes to maximize the spillover effects. The selected 
PTCs will serve as cluster leads of colleges, institutes, and training centers engaged in vocational training. 
Strengthening outreach services of PTCs is expected to help increase capacity of the cluster colleges. The selected 
PTCs will include the following activities in their SIPs to facilitate other TVET institutions (including private) in their 
clusters: (i) capacity enhancement training for staff of cluster TVET institutions; (ii) sharing updated curricula and 
teaching materials; (iii) availing PTCs’ equipment and workshops, laboratories, and digital learning facilities. 
Moreover, the PTCs will serve as model of best practices that can be replicated in these institutions. 
 
Component 2: Skills for Jobs (US$80 million equivalent) 
29. 
Component 2 will support short-term skills programs through a competitive and performance-based financing 
model that links payments to the employment outcomes of participants. This component will promote establishment 
of new training programs or expansion of existing programs for in-demand skills that demonstrate potential for high 
employment outcomes. Programs to be supported will cater to the needs of the local economies and deliver relevant 
foundational skills, soft-skills, green skills, digital skills, and entrepreneurship skills, in addition to sector-specific technical 
skills. Private, public and not-for-profit NGOs—will be able to submit proposals to apply for support from this component. 
Training providers will be competitively selected and will be paid following a performance-based model, on the basis of 
milestones achieved and verified—including the employment outcomes of program graduates. Approximately 100,000 
employed and unemployed youth in the age group 15-29 years old including Grade 12 or lower education, with priority 
for women (at least 55 percent), will benefit from wider access to certified short-term skills training programs through 
this component. In addition, rural, IDP, PWD and conflict-affected populations will be targeted.  
 
30. 
Proposals will be requested through a number of windows, and the selection will be done competitively using 
a points-based system and a set of eligibility and selection criteria. In addition to a general window, the call for proposals 
will include a “Green Skills Window” that will support training programs in areas such as renewable energy (solar, wind, 
etc.), agro-processing, waste management, eco-construction and eco-tourism among others to increase the supply of 
green skills in the labor market. An “Entrepreneurship Window” to strengthen self-employment outcomes, and a special 
window for IDPs to support trainees from the conflict-affected regions of Ethiopia will also be included. Other dedicated 
windows may be created according to different needs across regions and industry/entrepreneurship skills needs. The 
specific eligibility and selection criteria will be described in the implementation manual, to be developed and approved 
prior to any disbursement under this component. The quality of a proposal will be assessed on the basis of the willingness 
and capacity of the training provider to deliver greater access to disadvantaged groups and to place graduates into 
employment after training completion. Projected employment placements and earnings of program graduates will be 
given attention. Extra points will be awarded to the training of women in traditionally male-dominated trades, and to 
training programs catered to rural, and disadvantaged populations. Scoring criteria will promote training programs for 
 
31 Ibid. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Education and Skills for Employability Project (P177881) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 48  
     
 
industries prioritized by national policies that can benefit from additional guidelines on clean and sustainable practices. 
Two examples are automobile repairing and textile industry, where environmental needs have a primary role when 
developing training material for future sustainable employment needs. 
 
31. 
Payments will be outcome-based and dependent on completion of specific milestones. Payments will be 
structured to incentivize training providers to offer market-needs oriented and quality training programs, collaborate 
closely with employers, and pursue activities that are beneficial to their graduates’ wage- and self-employment 
outcomes. Milestones selected for reimbursement will include indicators such as the number of participants enrolled 
into the training; the number of participants who completed training and were tested and certified; and the labor market 
outcomes of participants post training. Each of these milestones are expected to be disaggregated by gender and other 
socioeconomic characteristics to be specified in the PIM. Labor market outcomes related milestones for payment will 
measure gainful employment/self-employment status of trainees within three months and gainful employment/self-
employment status and monthly earnings within six months of training completion. Programs that do not meet minimum 
employment targets will be dropped. Higher payments will be used to incentivize providers to select, train and place 
women, trainees from rural areas, IDPs and PWDs into jobs. 
 
32. 
A rigorous impact evaluation will be built ex-ante into the component design. The use of a randomized control 
trial impact evaluation has been agreed with MoLS to assess whether this component is achieving its intended outcomes 
and establish their causal impact by comparing outcomes between the control and treatment units (receiving the base 
and alternative options, respectively). Evaluation activities will be introduced during the pilot stage and continue as the 
component is rolled-out to allow for iterative learning and to identify adjustments to the design and implementation of 
these approaches that can generate larger positive changes in outcomes in subsequent rounds.  
 
Component 3: System Strengthening (US$10 million equivalent) 
 
33. 
Component 3 will enhance the information, coordination, and capacity of the TVET system to make it more 
dynamic in responding to the evolving technical skill needs in the economy and improving employability of its 
graduates. The recent establishment of MoLS, which brings under its umbrella the mandates for Labor, Employment, and 
Skills, provides an opportunity to effectively bring together key players to ensure a cohesive approach to addressing skills 
for jobs. The main challenges to realizing this promise are lack of information among actors, inadequate mechanisms for 
coordination, limitation in capacity, and weak incentives for engagement. The Project will address these challenges 
through the following three subcomponents: 
 
34. 
Subcomponent 3.1. Information for decision-making (US$3 million). The project will invest in creating an 
information system that aggregates existing data collection systems to enable skills analysis and forecasting to close the 
gaps between skills supplied by the TVET system and those demanded by employers. The skills management information 
system (SMIS) would integrate the available skills supply and demand information for decision-making at the local, 
woreda, and regional levels to the national level, including overseas markets. The SMIS would create a unifying language 
to assess the labor market for the priority sectors to quantify demand for training programs and map jobs and skills across 
the priority sectors to assess current and forecast future skills demand and identify mismatches. It would also enable 
targeting and profiling mechanisms to ensure the participation of women, rural and urban unemployed, PWDs, and IDPs. 
As part of the SMIS, the Project will conduct tracer studies to set the baseline for employment outcomes of TVET 
institutions across the country. 
 
35. 
Subcomponent 3.2. Strengthened system coordination (US$1 million). This subcomponent will support 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Education and Skills for Employability Project (P177881) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 48  
     
 
establishment of formal coordination mechanisms to ensure alignment of the skills supply and demand for improved 
employment outcomes. With support from this subcomponent, MoLS will establish SSCs for 4-5 priority sectors that bring 
together employers, the public sector (e.g., Ministry of Education, Ministry of Industry), and training institutions to ensure 
that skill demand and supply are aligned. The SSCs would help resolve fragmented decision-making amongst the different 
public and private actors to improve capacity, increase labor productivity, continuously adjust to changes in market 
demands and trends, and build an enabling skills ecosystem. 
 
36. 
Subcomponent 3.3 Strengthened system capacity for policymaking and implementation (US$ 6 million). This 
subcomponent will support MoLS in creating an enabling policy environment for sustained reforms in the skills 
development sector.  It will provide technical assistance for defining clear institutional arrangements with defined roles 
and responsibilities, developing industry-led occupational and assessment standards for training and certification to meet 
the skill demands in the priority sectors, and instituting incentives for industry and private sector engagement. It will also 
support evaluation of interventions to ensure inclusiveness of disadvantaged and marginalized groups (women, 
unemployed rural and urban, PWDs, IDPs, returnees, refugees and host communities, and immerging regions, etc.) with 
a focus on devising policies and interventions that improve their employment outcomes. The subcomponent will also 
support implementation of the new TVET reform policy through building the capacity of the ministry, regions, and 
woredas to ensure a resilient, adaptive, inclusive, and sustainable skills ecosystem.  
 
37. 
This sub-component will also finance a Delivery Unit (DU) which will oversee overall implementation of the 
project, compliance with fiduciary and social and environment risk management procedures and monitoring of and 
reporting on project activities. The sub-component will finance the activities related to these functions including the 
implementation of the environment and social measures and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities including the 
surveys and evaluations (see Section III.B).  
 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
 
38. 
Primary beneficiaries of the Project will be youth who will benefit both from increased opportunities for training 
that leads to employment as well as better quality training to ensure their success in the labor market. The Project is 
expected to benefit at least 200,000 youth (3 percent of NEET youth) directly through high quality training and linkages 
to employment, both in the formal sector and self-employment. Women (at least 50 percent of project beneficiaries), 
IDPs (at least 15 percent of project beneficiaries) and youth with disabilities (at least 8 percent of project beneficiaries) 
will be specifically targeted to benefit from training supported by the Project. Secondary beneficiaries of the Project 
include staff of PTCs and MoLS who will benefit from capacity building support. Lastly, employers are expected to benefit 
from better skilled labor that can contribute to their productivity and growth. 
 
D. Results Chain 
 
39. 
The Project provides a package of interventions to equip youth (particularly women and those from 
marginalized groups) with relevant skills to improve their employment prospects and increase labor productivity. The 
Results Chain is depicted in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Education and Skills for Employability Project (P177881) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 48  
     
 
Figure 1: Project results chain 
 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
 
40. 
Development resources channeled through the Government are essential to ensure longer-term solutions for 
TVET challenges in Ethiopia. The Government has strongly prioritized investment in education, with more than a fifth of 
public spending directed toward the education sector. It also recognizes the importance of strengthening the TVET 
system, and has invested in significantly expanding the TVET system, however, significant additional financing is needed 
to meet the targets for skills training for youth in the country and to improve the quality and relevance of the system. 
Private sector financing is limited, as the current TVET sector does not provide sufficient incentives for the involvement 
of private training providers. It is necessary to continue to promote private sector/industry involvement in TVET financing 
and encourage public-private partnerships. However, in addition to the complementary support and technical assistance 
provided by other donors, it is essential to increase public sector investment for TVET to ensure harmonization with the 
Component 3: System strengthening 
• SMIS 
• Tracer studies  
• Establishment of coordination 
mechanisms  
• Strengthen skills policy development 
capacity of MoLS  
Comp. 2: Skills for Jobs Competitively 
select short-cycle training programs for 
youth 
• Performance-based contracting of 
private and public training providers to 
offer short term training with incentives 
for targeting women, IDPs and other 
vulnerable and marginalized groups 
Component 1: Strengthening public 
polytechnics for improved labor market 
outcomes 
• Develop SIPs with industry partners 
• Establish IABs to strengthen governance 
• Develop new/revise training programs 
with industry partners with focus on 
women and IDPs 
• Increase entrepreneurship training 
• Increased cooperative training with 
employers 
• Improve quality of training delivered 
with better qualified faculty, improved 
facilities and equipment 
• Modern e-learning technologies piloted 
• Number of industry-
certified training 
programs (including 
digital) in priority 
sectors delivered 
 
• Number of youth 
who complete 
industry –certified 
diploma programs; 
50% women 
 
• Number of public 
polytechnics 
upgraded as sector-
specific training hubs 
with improved 
faculty and facilities 
 
• Skills for Jobs 
Development Fund 
operational 
 
• Number of youth 
complete industry-
certified short term 
training courses; 50% 
women 
 
• Increased evidence-
based  policy making 
capacity of MoLS 
 
• Increased 
employment 
rates of 
graduates of 
project-
supported 
training 
programs, 
disaggregated by 
gender, IDP and 
PWD 
 
• Increased 
number of 
students who 
complete 
project-
supported 
training 
programs with 
industry 
certification, 
disaggregated by 
male, female, 
rural, persons 
with disability, 
IDPs and green 
skills 
 
• Sector Skills 
Councils 
established 
• Mismatch between 
demand and supply of skills 
• Low relevance of attained 
skills of TVET graduates 
(mismatch with employers’ 
expectation) 
• Lack of employer 
partnership in skills training 
• Low employment, 
productivity and skills 
attainment of youth 
• Low representation of 
female students/trainees in 
industry employment 
• Large number of IDPs need 
to be integrated in labor 
market 
• Lack of information on 
demand and supply of skills 
• Lack of information on  
information employment 
outcomes of training 
programs 
• Lack of formal coordination 
mechanisms for employers, 
public sector and training 
providers 
• Weak Sector Management 
and Institutional capacity  
 
 
 
 
Challenges 
Higher level 
outcomes
Skilled labor force to improve productivity and economic growth 
Outcomes 
Outputs 
Interventions