[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 24425 chars (65.1% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Project Development Objective 
 
PDO Statement 
 
26. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve government institutional capacity to mobilize and 
manage public financial and human resources efficiently. 
 
PDO Level Indicators 
 
27. The following results indicators are proposed to measure progress towards achievement of the PDO: 
(a) Increase in the use of competency-based assessments in civil servant recruitment (percentage). 
(b) Reduction in the VAT compliance gap (% of GDP) (percentage). 
(c) Public availability of annual recurrent and capital budget execution reports and contract award information 
(Text).  
(d) Increase in civil servant beneficiaries’ experience with the quality of HRM practices (percentage).16 
 
B. Project Components 
 
28. The project will focus on the critical foundations for improved institutional and financial governance in Ethiopia 
and will finance four integrated components to address core issues of public sector capability. While the 
government’s reform program in these areas is ambitious and includes amongst others capacity and institutional 
building reforms across all ministries and a focus on transforming citizen services, modernizing a range of tax 
administrations including customs and establishing program budgeting at regional levels, these important reforms 
could be supported in future years through Additional Financing after assessing lessons from the first year of 
implementation of this project. Component 1 will focus on improving public administration management capabilities, 
through transitioning towards a data-informed approach to HRM, develop and promulgate competency-based 
recruitment and management processes, and address the fragmented institutional arrangements for civil servant 
capacity building. This component will also include a reform innovation facility to help key service delivery ministries 
to develop and implement key reform action plans for improving individual and institutional capabilities. Component 
2 will support initiatives to improve domestic revenue mobilization capabilities, with an emphasis on improving 
 
16 This indicator will be measured using a representative, face-to-face survey of civil servants. This composite index around civil servant beneficiaries 
experience with quality HRM practices will draw on objective, fact-based questions on the transparency and rigor of recruitment processes, the 
conduct and implications of performance appraisals, and access to, and quality of, training. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Governance Modernization to Enable Efficient Service Delivery Project (P178808) 
 
 
Page 10 of 41 
 
voluntary compliance through improved taxpayer services and closing compliance gaps by leveraging technology and 
data analytics. Component 3 will focus on public financial management, supporting the scale up of digital solutions 
for PFM, addressing critical process deficiencies across the PFM cycle, support the rollout and enhancement of the e-
GP system and support the professionalization of accountancy and procurement functions. Component 4 will support 
project management to ensure timely and successful implementation. 
 
29. The project will implement these interdependent reforms in public resource management in an integrated and 
innovative manner. While standalone reforms in civil service and public financial management need to be undertaken, 
in order to be catalytic and impactful, these reforms need to be embedded in sectors.  The project will therefore also 
focus on incentivizing institutional reform within Ministries. This twin focus is designed to both build foundational 
cross-cutting systems and at the same time mainstream institutional reforms within sectors to allow for more 
immediate impact and create a clear line of sight with improved service delivery. The theory of change of the project 
is based on the recognition that public sector management inefficiencies contribute to inefficiencies in revenue 
collection, low quality services and inequities in outcomes. Improved domestic resource mobilization is critical if 
Ethiopia is to expand financing for development in core service sectors. At the level of human resources, the skill -mix, 
capabilities and distribution of staff is crucial to the delivery of services particularly in critical sectors such as 
agriculture, health

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

-cutting capacity building and institutional development activities. A focus on these sectors is strategic, given that 
they account for the largest shares of both formal employment and public investment. Building capabilities on both 
cross-cutting themes of leadership and management as well as technical competencies for those engaged in areas 
such as agricultural outreach and extension, health, or childhood development is critical for Ethiopia and constitutes 
a new and innovative approach of mainstreaming governance within sectors catalyzing effective service delivery. 
 
31. The project will finance: (i) goods; (ii) works; (iii) consulting and non-consulting services; (iv) operational costs 
consultations; and (v) training.  
 
Component 1: Improving Public Administration Capabilities (US$25 million equivalent) 
 
32. The project will focus on three fundamental building blocks aligned with the GoE’s draft HGER 2.0, Civil Service 
Reform Roadmap and Civil Service Policy. The project will address the paucity of personnel and workforce data 
available to inform policymaking, the limited application of competency based HRM systems and practices in the 
recruitment and performance management of public sector workers, and the fragmented approach to civil servant 
 
The World Bank 
 
Governance Modernization to Enable Efficient Service Delivery Project (P178808) 
 
 
Page 11 of 41 
 
capacity building and training. This component is informed by the growing body of rigorous research on personnel 
management and lessons learned from World Bank engagements by emphasizing investments in data systems; 
ensuring that the civil service selects high ability and public service motivated individuals; and continues to incentivize 
and effectively train them during their careers. By focusing on productive and service delivery sectors, the project also 
ensures that these systemic reforms will result in a more effective civil service in the ministries and local governments 
that engage with citizens and businesses.    
 
Sub-component 1.1: Developing an Evidence-based and Data-Informed Approach to Human Resource Management 
 
33. The project will support the GoE to improve the functionality of HR information systems. The project will support 
the design, acquisition, configuration, and deployment of an Integrated Human Resource Payroll System (IHRPS), with 
online transaction and analytical processing functionalities and effect integration into the GoE’s IFMIS. The project 
will additionally support the establishment of an HR analytics unit within the CSC and tailored training on HR Data 
Analytics with a particular focus on analyzing gender disaggregated data, within the CSC and participating public 
bodies. 
 
34. In the first two years, the project will set up systems to collect and institutionalize the collection of gender 
disaggregated data on civil servants. By year three of the project, the findings and implications of this data will feed 
into the development of a National Human Resources Development Strategy, that will outline specific evidence-based 
actions for hiring, retention, and promotion of women in the civil service. In the last two years of the project, the 
project will select two pilot ministries based on gender gaps in civil servants, size and organizational champions and 
pilot a "deep dive” implementation of actions highlighted in the National Human Resources Development Strategy. 
This will include mentorship circles, leadership training for women and gender bias training for all senior civil servants. 
 
Sub-component 1.2: Competency-based Human Resource Management 
 
35. The project will support the transition towards competency based HRM practices, to enable the government to 
align officials’ knowledge, skills, and attitudes with its priorities, resulting in performance improvement and 
operational efficiencies. Project activities will be sequenced in order to build standardized processes and systems 
within the CSC, before piloting tailored activities with selected federal and regional public bodies in critical sectors 
including Health, Agriculture and Education. The sub-component will: (a) support structural-level changes, including 
the specification of job families, occupational classifications, and the development of a detailed job catalog, with 
clearly defined career paths for critical roles. This includes the Environment, Forests and Climate Change Commission 
(EFCCC) that manages the Climate Resilient Green Economy Facility and is responsible for monitoring and reporting 
against Ethiopia’s NDC realization; (b) the development of appropriate technical and behavioral competencies that 
includes gender and climate change awareness core skills accreditation for different levels of staff provided through 
the proposed integrated digital learning platform. Half of this allocation will be earmarked for institutional 
development of the EFCCC; (c) support the adoption of a merit- and competency-based recruitment framework that 
is encouraging of gender parity through the establishment of an online recruitment portal and Competency 
Assessment Centers under the CSC, and specialized training of HR units within the CSC and selected public bodies. The 
 
The World Bank 
 
Governance Modernization to Enable Efficient Service Delivery Project (P178808) 
 
 
Page 12 of 41 
 
framework and the assessment methodology will include screening for the ability to investigate, analyze and 
implement a climate action plan particularly for units (EFCCC, Ministries of Finance, Planning, Agriculture) directly in 
charge of co-ordinating climate action; and (d) the development and adoption of performance management practices 
including i) piloting a system of performance evaluation; ii) establishing career development criteria; iii) identifying 
benefit and incentive packages to support better efficiency, productivity and motivation of civil servants and benefit 
employees with special skills and abilities and iv) develop policies and regulations for outsourcing scarce skills and 
associated management and remuneration criteria. 
  
Sub-component 1.3: Institutionalizing Training, Capacity Building, and Change Management 
 
36. The project will address the need to institutionalize a coherent, sustainable approach to civil servant capacity 
building, based on a whole-of-government approach. The project will support: (a) streamlining of the fragmented 
approach to training delivery in the Civil Service University; and (b) the development of an integrated digital learning 
platform and content creation, with an initial emphasis on developing critical competencies in HRM, domestic revenue 
mobilization, and public financial management (including accounting and procurement), and in cross-cutting themes, 
including climate change adaptation and mitigation, and gender bias in the public sector.17  
 
Sub-component 1.4: Reform Innovation Facility 
 
37. The project will provide financing for a reform innovation facility within the CSC to support line ministries to: 
(a) establish delivery units comprising of technical and domain expertise to identify critical reforms and support the 
development of reform action plans to improve the value chains that lead to improved service delivery including 
human resources and financial management; (b) identify and set service standards for delivery functions; (c) identify 
key gaps in individual and institutional competencies needed to deliver services more efficiently; (d) develop new 
systems, processes and capacities to plan, deliver and monitor services; (e) conduct surveys that benchmark citizen 
satisfaction with service delivery; (f) develop frameworks for complaints and grievance redressal; and (g) design and 
implement  an initiative or program to incentivize individual or institutional reform champions. This sub-component 
will specifically support the priorities laid out in the draft HGER 2.0 that aim to establish an innovative, efficient and 
accessible government service delivery system. The CSC has the regulatory mandate to support public bodies to 
develop and implement institutional reform plans. The Reform Innovation Facility will provide pilot support to key 
ministries including the Ministries of Health, Education and Agriculture. Support will also be provided to Public 
Investment Management (PIM) units to strengthen the framework for addressing climate-related risks in 
infrastructure investment and capacity to assess institutional readiness to address climate change challenges. 
 
 
17 A green skills analysis will be first conducted to identify existing gaps and climate change adaptation and mitigation skills that will be needed in the 
future and align with the vulnerability and exposure context of Ethiopia. A programme that addresses these needs will then be considered in the 
training content created for the integrated digital learning platform. This is estimated to cost about US$2 million. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Governance Modernization to Enable Efficient Service Delivery Project (P178808) 
 
 
Page 13 of 41 
 
Component 2: Improving Domestic Revenue Mobilization Capabilities (US$20 million) 
 
38. The project will support the GoE in implementing key tax administration reforms to help it achieve the National 
Medium Term Revenue Strategy. This component contributes to achieving the Corporate Score Card Result 418. 
Ethiopia’s tax revenues-GDP ratio is below 15 percent and the project, through direct interventions, will help reverse 
the decline in VAT to GDP ratios and potentially increase the national tax-GDP collection by up to 30 percent. The 
project will leverage digital technology to address the need to strengthen voluntary compliance by improving the 
quality and availability of taxpayer services, as well as to use data analytics to help close tax gaps and improve tax 
administrative efficiency.  The support under this component will involve working with the MoR at both central and 
branch office-levels, and with the MoF’s Tax Policy Directorate. The activities under the component align with the 
existing legal framework. 
 
Sub-component 2.1: Leveraging Technology and Data Analytics to Support Risk-Based Tax Administration 
 
39. The project will support the GoE to leverage data analytics and technology to help close tax gaps. The project 
will support: (a) the articulation of functional requirements and detailed specifications for new digital solutions and/or 
enhancements to existing digital solutions to improve their interoperability and functionality; (b) the procurement of 
new hardware systems for a new data center to be housed in the MoR HQ in an existing facility; (c) the development 
of an e-invoicing system which will also improve targeting of non-compliant tax payers; (d) a comprehensive Tax Data 
Warehouse; (e) the digitization of excise administrative processes and establishing a modern excise tax administration; 
(f) improved data sharing; (g) the development of a system for automated selection of cases for audit; and, (h) 
replacement of the existing, outdated ITAS with a new ITAS system. Specifications for all new technologies and 
equipment procured through the project will meet or exceed the highest international standards that result in energy 
savings and net Green House Gases (GHG) reduction. About US$18 million will be spent on the purchase of energy-
efficient equipment under this component. 
 
40. Several administrative measures will be supported that will work to improve compliance. Compliance measures 
could include a program such as a VAT lottery to encourage consumers to ask for VAT receipts, provide SMEs better 
advice and support to comply and implement a stronger, risk-based approach to VAT controls. Data-analytics driven 
risk assessment to select cases for audits is critical to ensure that enforcement activities, including audits and other 
control measures, are effective and help reduce compliance gaps by detecting and penalizing tax under-payment to 
mobilize due taxes and create an atmosphere of deterrence. 
 
Sub-component 2.2: Improving the Quality and Availability of Taxpayer Services  
 
41. The project will support improved voluntary compliance by improving the quality and availability of taxpayer 
services. This sub-component will improve coverage and utilization of a range of e-services, including e-filing and e-
payment solutions. It will support: (a) digitalization of an on-line tax payer registration system; (b) streamlining and 
 
18 This Corporate Scorecard aims to ensure Effective macroeconomic and fiscal management by implementing reforms towards debt sustainability 
and  improving domestic  revenue mobilization in countries with a tax revenues to GDP ratio of less than 15 percent. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Governance Modernization to Enable Efficient Service Delivery Project (P178808) 
 
 
Page 14 of 41 
 
strengthening of e-filing and e-payment systems; (c) developing and implementing a transition plan to a self-
assessment regime; (d) strengthening systems to educate taxpayers, and developing procedures and actions to detect 
and penalize tax evasion; (e) the development and implementation of a taxpayers’ bill of rights;  and (f) streamlining 
of complaints management processes. The procurement process will ensure that the purchase of e-filing and e-
payment equipment meets international standards and lead to energy savings. About US$6 million will be spent on 
the purchase of such equipment to support the roll-out of e-filing and e-payment. Additionally, the expected increase 
in e-filing and e-payment is projected to annually reduce GHG emissions stemming from fewer visits to the MoR for 
tax purposes. The increased use of e-filing will also lower the environmental impact associated with toner and ink 
cartridges, lower the demand for paper, and mitigate deforestation.  
 
42. This sub-component will help the MoR in developing the capacity of front-line tax collection agents to engage 
with citizens productively. It will complement enhancements to e-tax governance processes, including the 
establishment of taxpayer service centers, so that e-filing and e-payment can be rolled out increasingly to cover all 
taxpayers. This will also have an important gender impact by making it easier for women entrepreneurs to meet their 
tax compliance obligations remotely, thus reducing their exposure to risks from discrimination, harassment and of 
physical security when attending tax offices. Taxpayer service centers will include women officials, ensuring greater 
ease of interaction for women. The project will further support gender disaggregation of tax data to better understand 
the impact of tax policies, design targeted policies, inform social policy and promote gender equality.  
 
Component 3: Improving Public Financial Management Capabilities (US$20 million) 
 
43. The project will support the GoE with investments aligned to the PFM Strategy.  The component will support the 
GoE in scaling up the use of technology, addressing critical deficiencies along the PFM cycle, the professionalization 
of accountants and procurement professionals within the public service, and the institutionalization of core training 
and Government-to-Government capacity building.  
 
Sub-component 3.1: Scaling up the use of technology for improved public financial management 
 
44. The sub-component will support the improved functionality and utilization of core government financial 
management information systems, including necessary hardware and software. This sub-component will support: 
(a) enhancements and upgrades to the IFMIS and Integrated Budgeting and Expenditure (IBEX) systems across levels 
of government; (b) enhancement, roll-out and sustainability of the e-GP system; (c) the design, acquisition, 
interfacing, and uptake of relevant ancillary systems, as required. The procurement process will ensure the adoption 
of modern technologies and equipment that align and/or surpass best international standards resulting in energy 
savings and energy-efficieny plans leading to a reduction in net GHG emissions. At least US$2.5 million will be 
dedicated to the acquisition of energy-efficient equipment.  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Governance Modernization to Enable Efficient Service Delivery Project (P178808) 
 
 
Page 15 of 41 
 
Sub-component 3.2: Address critical public financial management deficiencies 
 
45. The project will address fundamental constraints along the public financial management cycle which undermine 
efficient service delivery. The project will support the review of legal frameworks, guidelines, structures, processes, 
and manuals across critical PFM business processes, with a particular emphasis on ensuring the mainstreaming of 
citizen engagement, gender and climate consideration across the cycle. It will allocate US$4 million specifically for 
greening activities across the PFM cycle activities listed below.   
(a) Planning and Budgeting: the development of fiscal strategies, comprehensive publicly disseminated budget 
documentation, institutionalization of citizen participation mechanisms. 
(b) Budget Execution and Internal Controls: the operationalization of the Treasury Single Account and the 
strengthening of internal audit, inspection, treasury, and PIM functions. 
(c) Procurement: Support implementation of green procurement including development of a sustainable 
procurement policy and strategy, guidelines and implementation methodologies and the institutionalization 
of Key Performance Indicators and monitoring processes within the FPPPA. 
(d) Accounting and Reporting: national accounts consolidation, asset recording and reporting, fiscal risk 
reporting, service delivery reporting, the adoption of international reporting standards to improve the quality 
of financial data, and public disclosure of fiscal outcome information. 
(e) External Scrutiny: the capacity development of Federal and Regional Auditors General, Parliamentary 
Accounts Committee, and regulatory and oversight agencies (including the Federal Ethics and Anti-Corruption 
Commission (FEACC), Accounting and Auditing Board of Ethiopia (AABE) and Federal Public Procurement and 
Property Administration (FPPA).  
 
46. The greening activities supported by the sub-component include: the mainstreaming of NDCs in fiscal strategy 
plans and budget statements, climate assessments and prioritization criteria for new investment projects; integrating 
green criteria into contract agreements and performance clauses, installing operational systems for ensuring 
compliance of emergency procedures used in case of climate induced disasters, asset reporting including their 
contribution to GHG emissions, fiscal risk reporting including climate related fiscal risks and their impact on 
expenditure and revenue. 
 
Sub-component 3.3:  Institutionalizing Professional Training, Capacity Building, and Change Management 
 
47. The project seeks to address the dearth of qualified professional accountants and procurement professionals. 
This sub-component will support: a) AABE to develop and operationalize a professional accounting organization19; b) 
the development of professional certification programs including Procurement Professionalization and Certification 
Program and accountancy certifications programs. This will include embedding climate change competencies into the 
Procurement Certification Program such that all procurement professionals have basic skills on green public 
procurement and the establishment of a procurement certification body; c) the establishment and operationalization 
of dedicated Help Desks for IFMIS and the E-GP solutions to ensure that an institutional arrangement for supporting 
 
19  Discussions with GoE indicate an interest in establishing a new institution in the form of an “Ethiopian Institute of Certified Public Accountants”.