[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 70052 chars → Filtered: 54208 chars (22.6% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
1. 
Ethiopia, the second most populous country in Sub-Saharan Africa, has an estimated population of 123 million, 
with 77 percent living in rural areas. It has 98 ethnicities with roughly 93 languages spoken, as well as three major religious 
groups. There are 13 regions and two federal cities, under which there are more than 1,000 woredas (districts) and around 
16,000 kebeles (wards). There are significant opportunities and challenges arising from a rapidly rising working-age 
population in Ethiopia and its landlocked and strategic location of being surrounded by six countries. 
2. 
Despite Ethiopia’s success over the past decade with economic growth and reduction of extreme poverty from 
55 percent in 2000 to 25 percent in 2020, the country continues to face major challenges, including the impacts of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, natural disasters and climate-related events, internal conflicts, food insecurity, and high inflation. 
Real gross domestic product (GDP) growth is projected by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to be 6.1 percent in 
20231, down from 9 percent in 2019. Poor and vulnerable households are facing losses in real income and challenges in 
food affordability. Despite this, the Government of Ethiopia (GoE) aims to continue to provide basic services to people 
and to continue supporting and protecting the most vulnerable populations. 
3. 
Ethiopia has frequently experienced extreme climate events like droughts and floods, rainfall variability and 
increasing temperature among others,2 which have adversely impacted livelihoods.3 In 2022, almost 12 million people 
needed food assistance from five consecutive failed rainy seasons, and floods displaced more than half a million 
Ethiopians.4 Communities, especially in climate hot spots of Afar, Somali, and Oromia regions, which are often hit by severe 
droughts and floods,5 do not have access to digital connectivity and e-services, hampering the Government’s response to 
climate-related and other emergencies.  
4. 
Ethiopia aims to reach lower-middle-income status by 2025 and to reduce poverty to 7 percent by 2030. The 
latest 10-Year Development Plan aims to sustain growth while shifting toward a more private sector-driven economy. It 
also aims at fostering efficiency and competition in key growth-enabling sectors (for example, telecommunications), 
improving business climate, and addressing macroeconomic imbalances. The Government is also devoting a high share of 
its budget to pro-poor programs and investments, notably to the Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP) launched in 2005. 
5. 
Gender disparities in Ethiopia, including in access to economic opportunities for women, are profound. The 
2022 Global Gender Gap report ranked Ethiopia 74 out of 146 countries and 15 in Africa. The rank drops to 112 for 
economic participation and opportunities and to 133 for educational attainment.6 The 2022 Global Findex Survey7 found 
                                                          
1 International Monetary Fund, 2023. Website, accessed November 14th: imf.org/en/Countries/ETH#featured 
2 Drought is the most destructive climate-related natural hazard. Through 2100, there is a likely 20 percent increase in extreme high rainfall events. 
Flash floods and seasonal river floods are becoming more frequent and widespread. World Bank, 2021, Ethiopia Climate Risk Profile. 
3 This is particularly due to dependence on key sectors that are highly affected by climate change such as agriculture, water, tourism, and forestry 
(World Food Programme. Ethiopia Annual Country Report 2022). 
4 Ethiopia Country Climate Development Report, 2023, draft, World Bank. 
5 World Bank, 2021, Ethiopia Climate Risk Profile.  
6 World Economic Forum. 2022. Global Gender Gap Report, published July 2022. URL: https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2022.pdf. 
7 World Bank. 2022. The Global Findex Database 2021: Financial Inclusion, Digital Payments, and Resilience in the age of COVID-19. 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/globalfindex#sec1. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Digital ID for Inclusion and Services Project (P179040) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 39 
 
that only 39 percent of women had a financial account, compared to 55 percent of men, with the gap growing continuously 
since 2014 when the rates were 21 percent and 23 percent, respectively. 
6. 
Ethiopia hosts many forcibly displaced persons, including refugees and asylum seekers. Ethiopia is the third 
largest refugee-hosting country in Africa, with nearly 1 million refugees.8 The World Bank, following consultation with the 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), confirmed that the protection framework for refugees is 
adequate. Most refugees live in 24 camps across five regional states (Gambella, Somali, Benishangul-Gumuz, Afar, and 
Amhara). About 53 percent of refugees and asylum seekers are female, and 56 percent are children; together, women and 
children constitute some 80 percent of the refugee population. The unexpected arrival of additional thousands of refugees 
from Somali and Sudan starting in February/April 2023 have exacerbated socioeconomic challenges that had already 
become significant, with the UNHCR making supplementary appeals of US$41.7 million and US$19.3 million, respectively, 
to cover the needs of these refugees and host communities. Most refugee populations and host communities are in fragile 
border areas with limited services and economic potential. These communities remain vulnerable to conflict and climate-
related crises, with acute needs and limited opportunities for self-reliance. 
7. 
As of June 2023, nearly 3.4 million internally displaced persons (IDPs) were displaced across 2,750 accessible 
sites in Ethiopia, excluding Tigray region,9 largely resulting from the ongoing conflict in northern Ethiopia and localized 
conflicts and tensions in different parts of the country10. Stateless persons and persons at risk of statelessness, especially 
long-term refugees, also face challenges in exercising their rights and accessing services because of problems with 
obtaining adequate proof of identity. By implementing an accessible identification system, these challenges can be 
addressed by promoting inclusivity, economic empowerment, and integration for stateless populations. 
8. 
The internal conflicts have limited economic growth and reduced access to basic services and infrastructure. In 
Tigray, efforts began after the peace deal to restore basic services and rebuild infrastructure. Improving access to services 
and economic opportunities, including those facilitated by the Federal Government, can help ensure that peace can be 
maintained. Despite progress in northern Ethiopia following the cessation of hostilities agreement signed in November 
2022, internal conflicts continue to be a concern in other regions such as Amhara, Gambela, and Oromia. 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
9. 
Foundational ID systems11 are broadly recognized as key enablers for inclusive digitalization and development. 
For people, the ability to establish and verify their identity is often a prerequisite for access to services and economic 
opportunities, such as social protection, healthcare, education, financial services, and employment. Proof of legal identity 
is also the basis for exercising rights, such as property ownership, and nationality. For governments and businesses, ID 
systems can serve as a platform for more effective and efficient service delivery by enabling the unique identification and 
verification of persons. Importantly, ID systems can promote greater inclusion by de-risking and reducing the costs of 
                                                          
8 UNHCR's Ethiopia Update on the Total Number of Refugees and Asylum Seekers as of August 31, 2023. 
9 In Tigray, new internal displacement data has been reported, including 1,021,798 IDPs (250,468 households) in 643 sites across six zones (excluding 
20 woredas/districts hard to reach due to security or environmental factors). 
10 IOM. 2023. Ethiopia National Displacement Report 16 - Site Assessment Round 33 and Village Assessment Survey Round 16: Nov 2022 - Jun 2023. 
https://reliefweb.int/report/ethiopia/ethiopia-national-displacement-report-16-site-assessment-round-33-and-village-assessment-survey-round-
16-november-2022-june-2023. 
11 Foundational ID systems are primarily created to provide credentials to the general population as proof of identity for a wide variety of public and 
private sector transactions. Common types of foundational ID systems include civil registries, national ID systems, and population registers. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Digital ID for Inclusion and Services Project (P179040) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 39 
 
service delivery. It is for these reasons that, “by 2030, provide legal identity for all, including birth registration,” was 
included as target 16.9 in the Sustainable Development Goals. 
10. 
Well-designed and universally accessible foundational ID systems can promote reconciliation and a sense of 
national unity and identity. Qualitative research by the World Bank’s Identification for Development (ID4D) initiative in 
Côte d'Ivoire, Rwanda, the Philippines, and Timor-Leste, which has engaged vulnerable citizens and residents, has shown 
that one of the key benefits of ID systems is the sense of belonging that is attached to having an ID issued by the State 
that has their identity displayed on it. There is the notable case of Peru, which the Centre for Global Development (CGD) 
described as, “…a remarkable example of a country that established civil identification as a national priority in response 
to the need to re-integrate the state after a serious insurgency.”12 ID agents in the field are often one of, if not the most, 
visible representation of the State in many communities, and identification can be the only universally-used service in a 
country. ID systems can help establish the presence of the State and show its value in the minds of the population. 
11. 
Foundational ID systems is one of the three main building blocks of digital public infrastructure (DPI).13 As more 
transactions move online and the importance of the digital economy and digital government rapidly grows, there is also a 
need for digital ID systems to equip people with the ability to securely prove their identity online, without requiring 
physical presence and allow transactions to be done completely online. Traditional credentials, such as the paper Kebele 
ID currently in use in Ethiopia and birth certificates, cannot support such remote transactions. 
12. 
Ethiopia is one of the few countries in the world that does not have a national-scale foundational ID system 
with digital capabilities. Despite enacting the Registration of Vital Events and National Identity Card Proclamation in 2012, 
the national identity card that it provided for has never been implemented. A paper-based ID issued by kebeles (and known 
as the Kebele ID) is the most common proof of identity in Ethiopia, even though its primary purpose is proof of address 
and residence. A Kebele ID is often required to access public and private services, obtain other IDs such as driver’s licenses 
and passports, and formal procedures like proving land ownership.14 The features of the Kebele ID vary by kebele, but they 
generally display handwritten demographic information and address and include a stapled photo. 
13. 
According to the 2017 ID4D-Findex Survey, 36 percent of the population aged 18 and older lack a Kebele ID, 
with a significant gender gap of 46 percent of women lacking one compared to 25 percent of men, creating barriers for 
a large portion of people to access services and economic opportunities. Kebele ID coverage reaches 70 percent for 
adults older than 25 and 80 percent for the highest income quintile. Obtaining a Kebele ID often requires residing in a 
location for a minimum period (for example, six months), which leads to exclusion of internal migrants and refugees. Being 
tied to residence also means that a Kebele ID cannot serve as a continuous identification throughout the life of an 
individual, as one may move. Most Kebele IDs display holder’s ethnicity, which is a potential source of discrimination. The 
lack of uniformity among the forms of Kebele ID cards and the ease of forgery add substantial identity risks for service 
providers. Records are often paper ledgers vulnerable to damage, tampering, unauthorized use, identity theft, and loss 
due to fires or natural disasters like floods. 
14. 
The current ID landscape in Ethiopia has four main weaknesses. First, inefficiency: the absence of identity 
verification capabilities for online and even for in-person service delivery adds transaction costs through manual 
                                                          
12 CGD. 2017. “Identification as a National Priority: The Unique Case of Peru - Working Paper 454.” 
https://www.cgdev.org/publication/identification-national-priority-unique-case-peru.  
13 DPI refers to a set of foundational systems and their organizational frameworks (for example, laws and institutions) that enable core functions in 
today's digital age, including the ability to verify identities, to send and receive money, and to exchange data. 
14 World Bank. 2022. Voluntary Migration in Ethiopia: In Search for Work and Better Opportunities. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Digital ID for Inclusion and Services Project (P179040) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 39 
 
processes. Second, exclusion: gaps in Kebele ID coverage among adults and low birth registration coverage (around 20 
percent in 202215). Third, fraud-related risks: inability to reliably verify an individual’s unique identity, particularly for use 
cases that require higher levels of assurance, such as cash transfers and obtaining credit. Finally, lack of interoperability: 
the lack of common standards for identity information and population-scale unique identification makes it difficult for 
public and private sector service providers to share and reuse data to improve outcomes for people. 
15. 
Exclusion from access to IDs and services particularly affects IDPs and women who live in rural areas and migrate 
for marriage and domestic labor jobs, as well as refugees. Kebele IDs are commonly associated with the ‘head of 
household’ (a traditionally male role) and are mainly required for opening a financial account or getting formal 
employment outside the home (both of which men are more likely to do). Consequently, women are less likely to pursue 
getting a Kebele ID. Indeed, early results from qualitative research by ID4D reveal that although there are no legal 
obstacles for women to access Kebele IDs, there are symbolic and practical barriers. Moreover, not having an ID can also 
lead to harassment and arrest by police officers as a migrant may be considered as an illegal resident. During displacement, 
IDPs may seek refuge elsewhere in the country and face challenges to renew their Kebele ID. The low birth registration 
rate in the country (20 percent) further enhances the risk of de facto statelessness for children. 
16. 
Though Ethiopia has an inclusive policy environment for refugees, they face similar challenges with regard to 
documentation in Ethiopia, which hampers their access to services and economic opportunities. The Government has 
affirmed its commitment to supporting long-term inclusion through its 2019 Refugee Proclamation, a 10-year National 
Comprehensive Refugee Response Strategy, an Out of Camp Policy, 2019 Global Refugee Forum (GRF) pledges,16 and an 
April 2023 Strategy Note provided to the World Bank. Through these, refugees have the right to work, access national 
services, and register vital events, including births and marriages, directly with national authorities. However, 
implementation of these policies faces challenges. During the conflict in northern Ethiopia, refugee registration was 
paused but now has been largely resumed. One of the main challenges is that special identification issued to refugees by 
the Refugees and Returnees Service (RRS) and UNHCR are not widely recognized by service providers such as banks and 
mobile network operators, hindering their integration and access to services. The GoE’s decision to provide the same kind 
of identification to refugees (Fayda)17 as it will to nationals, is a significant step for inclusion and long-term solutions. 
17. 
The GoE has sought to resume previously paused registration of refugees with support from UNHCR and has 
collaborated across government to include refugees at the outset within Fayda. In line with Government policy 
commitments (PCs), RRS, the National ID Program (NIDP), and UNHCR signed a Data Sharing Agreement in October 2023 
to “help refugees easily access basic services such as health insurance, education, banking, and driving, among other 
things.” NIDP concretized its commitment to include refugees in their Fayda IDs target for which the Data Sharing 
Agreement is a key prerequisite, and RRS participated in the preparation of this project. Concurrently, RRS and UNHCR 
have signed a Registration Multi-Year Joint Strategy for Refugees in Ethiopia to further facilitate the registration of 
refugees in the country. Political instability in the region, which remains unpredictable because of national and 
neighboring countries’ political instability, conflict, and humanitarian crisis, risks future refugee inflows into Ethiopian 
territory, and these agreements will strengthen Ethiopia’s ability to prepare for these. 
                                                          
15 World Bank. ET - Health SDG Program for Results (P123531) Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review. 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099041923195522835/pdf/P1235310c601d00940959307b7687b4eccf.pdf.  
16 The GoE (RRS) is now fine-tuning its draft pledges for the upcoming second GRF to be held in December 2023. It is expected that refugee inclusion 
in the Fayda Digital ID system will contribute toward filling identification-related gaps in the pledge implementation process. 
17 Fayda is the official brand name of the Ethiopian digital identification initiative. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Digital ID for Inclusion and Services Project (P179040) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 39 
 
18. 
According to the latest data available from UNICEF, only 3 percent of children under 5 years of age have their 
birth registered.18 Through the World Bank-funded Health SDG Program (P123531), the percentage of births occurring in 
a given year that were registered attained 20.9 percent in 2022.19 In 2016, kebeles introduced paper-based and manual 
recording of births, deaths, marriages, and divorces. In May 2021, the Immigration, Nationality and Vital Events Agency—
now known as Immigration and Citizenship Services (ICS)—unveiled a Civil Registration and Vital Statistics Improvement 
Plan for 2022–2026.20 Digitalization is a major component, supported by the World Bank’s Program for Results (Hybrid) 
for Strengthening Primary Health Care Services (P175167) project. 
19. 
In line with the Digital Ethiopia 2025 Strategy,21 the GoE began an initiative in 2019 to establish a foundational 
ID system as a complement—not a replacement—to the existing Kebele IDs. The intention of the new ID system is to 
provide a trusted source of identity, including for online transactions, while Kebele IDs will continue to provide proof of 
address and residence. In the same year, the GoE developed the Principles and Governance Structure of the National 
Identity Program, which emphasized inclusion for all residents (including refugees) of Ethiopia and alignment with the 
Principles on Identification for Sustainable Development.22 Responsibility was transferred from the Ministry of Innovation 
and Technology (MInT) to the Ministry of Peace in 2020 and subsequently to the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) in 2021, 
where it became NIDP. The NIDP will be transferred to a permanent ID Institution once the latter is established. 
20. 
During March–June 2022, NIDP carried out a registration pilot, enrolling 124,233 people using open-source 
software that was integrated in-house. The pilot registrations focused on workers at Addis Bole Lemi and Hawassa 
Industry Parks, higher education students, customers of several participating banks, and PSNP beneficiaries in five woredas 
located across two regions (Oromia and Sidama). Following an evaluation by NIDP, it was decided to proceed with the 
open-source software approach. By November 2023, the registration pilot had reached over 3 million individuals who had 
voluntarily registered in the system. NIDP is also close to signing a tripartite memorandum of understanding (MoU) with 
RRS and UNHCR to be able to share data for the issuance of a Fayda ID to refugees and asylum seekers. 
21. 
Following extensive stakeholder engagement and preparatory work, the Digital ID Proclamation was 
promulgated in March 2023 to create legal grounds for the foundational ID system, now known as Fayda, meaning value 
in several local languages, and an ID Institution to implement it. Fayda is envisioned to provide a unique ID to all nationals 
and residents from birth. It is designed to encompass these key elements: being nationwide in scope; being accessible to 
Ethiopian nationals and residents; providing a unique and random number (with the possibility to tokenize it for enhanced 
data protection); leveraging digital technologies; and maintaining the security of personal data. The ID system collects 
minimal data, including only four mandatory fields (full name, gender, date of Birth, and current address), while excluding 
sensitive information like ethnicity and religion. It also incorporates three biometric modalities (face, fingerprint, and 
irises) for enhanced security, with exceptions to handling procedures in case of disability. While the ID Proclamation is 
largely aligned with international good practices, there are some areas that need clarity and elaboration, such as the 
institutional and governance arrangements for the ID Institution and its relationship with a future Data Protection 
                                                          
18 UNICEF. 2019. Fact Sheet Birth Registration. Ethiopia, Child Protection 
https://www.unicef.org/ethiopia/media/1651/file/Birth%20registration%20factsheet%20.pdf  
19 Health SDG Program for Results, 2023 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099041923195522835/pdf/P1235310c601d00940959307b7687b4eccf.pdf  
20 Immigration, Nationality and Vital Events Agency, Civil Registration and Vital Statistics Systems Improvement Strategy and Costed Action Plan of 
Ethiopia: 2021/22–2022/26, April 2021. 
21 For more information about Digital Ethiopia 2025, see https://www.lawethiopia.com/images/Policy_documents/Digital-Ethiopia-2025-Strategy-english.pdf  
22 For more on the principles, see http://idprinciples.org     
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Digital ID for Inclusion and Services Project (P179040) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 39 
 
Proclamation, among others. The Data Protection Proclamation approved by the Council of Ministers in October 2023 and 
expected to be ratified by Parliament in 2024, is critical for further mitigating personal data protection risks. 
22. 
NIDP has identified high-impact use cases for Fayda, especially links with and between financial inclusion and 
social protection, to improve lives and livelihoods. It has been engaging and establishing partnerships with various 
government agencies and businesses to understand their requirements and problems, as well as to engage with other 
countries to learn lessons and good practices. To this end, NIDP has signed several MoUs with banks, Ethio Telecom, and 
Safaricom and has engaged with the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Education, and Ministry of Health, to collaborate on 
awareness raising and pilots. In the area of financial inclusion, the National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) released a new directive 
in 2021 to strengthen know-your-customer (KYC) requirements across the financial sector to discern individual customer 
uniqueness for all transaction types.23 This new requirement is overwhelming for both the banks and the people, both with 
and without a Kebele ID. Fayda, by providing a digitally verifiable ID, is envisioned to provide enough assurance to waive 
these controls, hence reducing costs, time, and risks associated with account opening and credit applications. This is 
particularly important as social assistance programs like the PSNP (which can be gateways for financial inclusion) are currently 
being digitalized with the transition to digital payments and a new management information system (MIS) to replace the 
current manual processes used to target and enroll beneficiaries. Fayda can also improve the integrity and transparency of 
this rather complex and currently paper-based safety nets delivery chain. There is also interest from the GoE to use Fayda to 
support microfinance for farmers and for providing ID to students ages 16 and older. This is being done to certify diplomas, 
community health insurance, public and private pensions, use of mobile money and microloans, and SIM card registration. 
23. 
Fayda could also play an important role in realizing peace dividends in Ethiopia. First, at the social level, Fayda 
will enable all citizens and residents to exercise their rights related to having proof of their legal identity, and it will be the 
first universally accessible ID system that only focuses on individual identity, without collecting information on ethnicity 
nor religion. Furthermore, as a national system (compared to a collection of kebele systems), it can create a sense of 
belonging and will have a consistent look and feel, providing equal access to services for all registered persons. Second, 
the Fayda ID system can foster inclusion and shared prosperity by improving access to services and economic 
opportunities. As a digital system, Fayda will enable the Government, businesses, and civil society to harness digital 
technologies to make products and services more inclusive and human centered. 
24. 
The World Bank, through ID4D, has been providing technical assistance to the GoE on ID issues since 2016, and 
modest financing for upstream activities through Digital Foundations Project (P171034) since 2021. An ID4D Diagnostic 
was completed in 201724 and updated in 2019. In 2020, a legal assessment was carried out, which contributed to the 
Principles and Governance Structure of the National Identity Program published by the GoE. The ID4D technical assistance 
also contributed to the development of the Digital ID Proclamation, now adopted. In 2021, ID4D worked with NIDP to do 
a costing for a Fayda rollout, which came up with (a) registering adults ages 18 and older only (US$283 million or US$3.8 
per registrant), (b) registering adults and children ages 14 and older only (US$308 million or US$3.5 per registrant), and 
(c) registering adults and children ages 5 and older only (US$334 million or US$2.8 per registrant). The World Bank has 
also worked with NIDP to map use cases for Fayda, including identifying complementary World Bank engagements. During 
2022 pilots, ID4D conducted an exit survey and focus group discussions among PSNP beneficiaries who registered for 
Fayda to get insights on any shortcomings of registration processes to fine-tune registration during scale-up. A conflict 
analysis and end-user survey have contributed to the design and risk mitigation measures for this project. 
                                                          
23 NBE. 2021. Requirements for Undertaking Account Based Transactions and Ensuring of Regulatory Limits Directive No. FIS/04/2021. 
24 World Bank. 2016. ID4D Country Diagnostic: Ethiopia. https://id4d.worldbank.org/country-action/id4d-diagnostics.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Digital ID for Inclusion and Services Project (P179040) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 39 
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
25. 
The project contributes to all three Focus Areas of the Ethiopia Country Partnership Framework (FY18-FY22, 
Report 119576-ET). Fayda will improve access to and efficiency of economic and financial services (Objective 1.1), social 
protection (Objective 2.1), health care and continuous care (Objective 2.2), education for all (Objective 2.4), management 
of job employment programs (Objective 2.6), and child protection (Objective 2.5). Furthermore, the project will build 
capacity and increase transparency for the delivery of public services (Objective 3.1). 
26. 
The project is aligned with the World Bank’s Evolution and new mission to end extreme poverty on a livable 
planet. The project will support Ethiopia to better harness digital technologies, including through public and private sector 
solutions, to enhance access to services and economic opportunities, while strengthening capabilities to manage risks 
related to exclusion and digital security. With respect to the Evolution, the project’s design and implementation is and will 
continue to draw on the World Bank’s knowledge and research. Digital public infrastructure, including digital ID and data 
sharing platforms that are supported by this project, are one of three elements of the Global Challenge Program on 
Accelerating Digitalization. 
27. 
The project is contributing to four other World Bank important strategies and initiatives:  
a. Gender Strategy. The project will close gender gap in ID coverage in Ethiopia that exists today (21 percent 
for Kebele IDs) and will ensure that Fayda’s systems and processes are gender sensitive, thereby improving 
their access to services and economic opportunities. Furthermore, the project will contribute to improving 
human endowments, removing constraints to more and better jobs for women, and removing barriers to 
women’s ownership and control over assets (Annex 3). 
b. IDA-20 policy commitments (PCs). This includes closing gaps in digital technology for women (Gender PC5), 
expanding adaptive social protection (Human Capital PC4), expanding access to services for persons with 
disabilities (Human Capital PC6), and enabling digital government services (Governance PC3).  
c. Mobilizing finance for development (MFD).25 By removing binding constraints (such as the current inability 
to effectively verify the identities of people) the project is supporting sustainable private sector solutions. 
This will be achieved by leveraging the competitive advantage of the private sector to provide Fayda 
registration activities in hard-to-reach areas through the super-agent model and enabling private sector 
service providers to verify identities, which in turn would incentivize the expansion of private sector-led 
service offerings and corresponding investments. 
d. Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV). By ensuring that Fayda is accessible for refugees, host communities, 
and IDPs, the project will be contributing to fulfilling the principle of inclusion and mitigating the spillovers 
of FCV, as well as helping Ethiopia to transition out of fragility. Impactful results are expected especially to 
those who do not have access to pre-Fayda forms of identification that are required for access to services 
and economic opportunities. 
28. 
In terms of Paris alignment, the project is aligned with Ethiopia’s 2021 Updated Nationally Determined 
Contribution (NDC),26 which outlines the need to build a climate-resilient green economy as one of its strategic pillars. 
                                                          
25 The MFD objective is to mobilize private finance enabled by upstream reforms and public funding, where necessary, to address market failures 
and other constraints to private investments. 
26 Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. Updated Nationally Determined Contribution, July 2021. 
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-06/Ethiopia%27s%20updated%20NDC%20JULY%202021%20Submission_.pdf   
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Digital ID for Inclusion and Services Project (P179040) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 39 
 
This necessitates climate-proofing digital investments but also leveraging digital technologies, such as digital ID, to 
strengthen the resilience of vulnerable communities. Digital ID facilitates resiliency-enhancing schemes, such as safety 
nets programs that cushion vulnerable individuals against impacts of climate change induced food insecurity. The project 
is aligned with Ethiopia’s Long-term Low Emissions and Climate Resilient Development Strategy (2020–2050) and the 
National Adaptation Plan (2019) that recognize the role of data management for climate action.  
29. 
The project supports Ethiopia’s implementation of key African digital transformation initiatives. The project 
supports operationalization of the World Bank’s Digital Economy for Africa (DE4A) strategy in Ethiopia and the African 
Union’s Digital Transformation Strategy for Africa and Digital ID Interoperability Framework for Africa.

A. Project Development Objective 
PDO Statement 
30. 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to establish an inclusive digital ID ecosystem and improve service 
delivery for registered persons in Ethiopia. 
PDO Level Indicators 
31. 
The achievement of the PDO will be measured by the following results indicators: 
 
(a) Number of people in Ethiopia who have received a Fayda ID 
 
(i) 
Percentage of whom are women and girls. 
(ii) 
Number of whom are refugees. 
(iii) Number of whom are individuals living in refugee host communities. 
(iv) Number of whom registered in remote and hard to reach areas. 
 
(b) Number of successful digital ID authentications by Fayda ID holders to access public and private sector services. 
(i) 
Number of which are in areas hosting refugees. 
B. Project Components 
32. 
The project design provides comprehensive support for Fayda implementation27 in accordance wit

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

 
3.3. Supporting integration of Fayda and digital civil registration systems 
4 
— 
4 
4. Improving service delivery 
20 
15 
35 
4.1. Supporting integration of Fayda 
12 
15 
27 
4.2. Developing an Ethiopia digital stack  
8 
— 
8 
5. Project management 
10 
2 
12 
Total 
300 
50 
350 
Note: WHR = Window for Host Communities and Refugees. 
Component 1 - Building institutions and trust (US$21 million equivalent – US$16 million IDA, US$5 million WHR) 
33. 
This component will invest in the ‘analogue’ foundations, including stakeholder engagement, legal frameworks, 
and the institutions that are key for the successful implementation of Fayda and use cases. 
34. 
Subcomponent 1.1 – Supporting stakeholder engagement and communications (US$9 million IDA, US$5 million 
WHR). The subcomponent will support a two-way engagement with the population (especially vulnerable groups), 
regional governments and kebeles, service-providing agencies, civil society, academia, the private sector, and other 
stakeholders to inform the implementation of all aspects of Fayda, notably to implement corrective measures if needed 
to ensure that Fayda remains inclusive for all and to raise awareness about Fayda and its use, promote registration and 
usage, and address misinformation. A special focus will be on including and addressing host communities and refugees 
with adapted communication strategies, including in their own languages, and using culturally sensitive methods. The 
activities will consider regional contextualities, languages and cultural norms, and the need for information, education, 
and communication to be accessible (for example, for persons with disabilities and those with lower literacy). Funds will 
be used for provision of goods, consulting services, non-consulting services, training, and operating costs for (a) carrying 
out information, education, and communication activities and engagement with various stakeholders to raise awareness 
about Fayda and its use, to promote registration and usage, and to address misinformation; (b) scaling up grievance 
redress mechanisms (GRMs) through in-person and online help desks, and Fayda mobile app; and (c) developing 
information systems and processes including, digital and physical media production, workshops, events, and advertising. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Digital ID for Inclusion and Services Project (P179040) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 39 
 
35. 
Subcomponent 1.2 – Establishing and operationalizing the ID Institution (US$4 million IDA). This will support the 
establishment of the ID Institution, as provided for in the Digital ID Proclamation, and its presence in all regions and two 
chartered cities to coordinate registration and ID issuance operations, use case development, communications, 
stakeholder engagement, and grievance redress. The local presence of the ID Institution may be co-located with Fayda 
centers and regional offices of ICS and/or other federal authorities. Additionally, through the WHR fund, interoperability 
between existing refugee registration (RRS and UNHCR) will be worked on to make refugee registration as efficient as 
possible in the already existing registration environment (triangle data sharing agreement RRS/UNHCR/NIDP). 
36. 
Subcomponent 1.3 – Establishing and operationalizing the Data Protection Commission of Ethiopia (US$3 
million IDA). Subject to the passage of the Personal Data Protection Proclamation, this will support the establishment of 
the federal data protection Commission and its local presence. 
Component 2 - Establishing scalable and secure Fayda ICT infrastructure (US$68 million equivalent - US$60 million 
IDA, US$8 million WHR) 
37. 
This component will invest in developing Fayda’s software and hardware with a view to ensuing high performance 
and scalability, system integrity and security, interoperability, and vendor and technology neutrality.  
38. 
Subcomponent 2.1 - Supporting the design, development and maintenance of appropriate software for Fayda 
(US$40 million IDA, US$4 million WHR). This subcomponent will support NIDP in developing, maintaining, and enhancing 
open-source software for Fayda and NIDP’s back-office operations, including upgrading and scaling up Fayda systems 
developed as part of the pilots to date and developing a mobile ID application that will include a consented data-sharing 
function and a digital wallet to store, present, and share data and verifiable credentials29 as well as integration and 
interoperability with other sectoral systems, notably RRS and UNHCR systems for refugees specifically. Funds will be used 
for supporting: (i) the design, development, and maintenance of appropriate software for Fayda and back-end operations, 
including upgrading and scaling up existing Fayda systems; (ii) developing a mobile ID application incorporating a 
consented data-sharing function and a digital wallet; (iii) supporting system integration and interoperability with other 
sectoral systems; iv) procuring software, licenses, and subscriptions for automated biometric identification systems; (v) 
software development kits for registration and authentication processes; (vi) ID card personalization and lifecycle 
management; (vii) the short message service; (viii) public key infrastructure for encrypting and digitally-signing data; and 
(ix) back-office systems such as enterprise resource planning tools, business intelligence and data analysis tools for 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and x) various collaboration tools. 
39. 
Subcomponent 2.2 – Supporting development of data infrastructure (US$15 million IDA, US$3 million WHR). 
Funds will be used for the development of data infrastructure such as ID data storage and computing capabilities for Fayda 
through server equipment expected to be co-located in the existing data centers, as well as business continuity through 
disaster recovery and backup systems, procurement of data center software, minor renovations to existing data center 
facilities, cloud computing subscriptions, and related licenses. The primary data center to house Fayda server equipment 
is expected to be in the national data center being financed by the Digital Foundations Project (P171034). The secondary 
data center(s) will be at existing co-location facilities to be identified by NIDP. The purchase of the energy-efficient server 
equipment for the existing data centers will be in accordance with internationally recognized best practices on energy 
                                                          
29 For instance, by using the World Wide Web Consortium’s (W3C) Verifiable Credentials standard. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Digital ID for Inclusion and Services Project (P179040) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 39 
 
efficiency.30  The project will undertake a climate risk assessment to assess risks (typically floods).31 This will inform the 
location of IT equipment and other relevant mitigation measures.  The project will also embed automated backup and 
disaster recovery system to avoid data loss in the event of climate calamities. 
40. 
Subcomponent 2.3 - Strengthening digital security (US$5 million IDA, US$1 million WHR). This subcomponent 
will support NIDP to strengthen its operational, technological, and policy capabilities for information and cybersecurity 
aspects of Fayda, which is particularly important due to the vulnerability of refugees and host communities. NIDP will 
collaborate with MInT and other parties on various cybersecurity aspects that are being funded from the Digital 
Foundations Project (P171034) and the new regional operation Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II 
(P180931). Funds will be used for strengthening digital security including operational, technological, and policy capabilities 
for information and cybersecurity aspects of Fayda as well as the development of strategies and standard operating 
procedures; procurement of appropriate equipment and subscriptions for network and security operations centers; 
capacity building; third-party security and software code audits and associated services; and subscriptions and tools for 
monitoring, preventing, and responding to cyber threats. 
Component 3 - Inclusive ID issuance (US$214 million equivalent - US$194 million IDA, US$20 million WHR) 
41. 
This component will finance the voluntary registration and issuance of physical and digital IDs to at least 90 
million32 Ethiopian nationals and nonnationals (for example, refugees, other migrants, and stateless persons) in line with 
the strategies described in Error! Reference source not found. and good practices elaborated in Annex 2. The targeted 
registered population of 90 million is in addition to registrations that are being financed by the Government or the 
registration partners such as banks, estimated to reach at least 5 million people before effectiveness. The planned ID 
registration processes have been enhanced by pilots and proofs of concept, including for refugees, and are expected to be 
easy and accessible, notably to persons with disabilities and other marginalized/vulnerable groups, with information 
available in a variety of formats and from a range of trusted sources. To avoid exclusion, registrants will be able to present 
over 30 official documents, including a Kebele ID or birth certificate. Any persons without these could have their claimed 
identity vouched for by a trusted ‘introducer’ who is already registered in Fayda, such as a husband introducing his wife or a 
village chief introducing an elderly person. 
Box 1. Fayda Registration and Credential Strategies 
To have accessible and scalable reach, there will be four channels for registration and ID issuance (Figure 1). Two of these channels 
(registration partners and super agents) will be outsourced for a fixed fee between US$0.60 and US$3.80 per registration (subject 
to inflation), depending on the location.33 NIDP will supervise the implementation of these two outsourced channels through audits, 
spot checks, and other methods. The four channels are as follows: 
(a) Registration partners. These are government agencies and state-owned enterprises selected by NIDP based on client profile, 
geographic coverage, and technical and fiduciary capacity. The intention is to provide convenient registration and to leverage 
existing client relationships with partners, such as beneficiaries of social safety net programs and license applicants. NIDP 
will provide registration kits, software, and training, notably to ensure compliance with nondiscrimination principles and 
special measures for individuals with disabilities or vulnerability. The partners will provide facilities, staffing, and 
                                                          
30 For example the EU Code of Conduct on Data Centre Energy Efficiency or  International Telecommunication Union recommendations on green data 
centers. 
31 Flash floods and seasonal river floods are becoming more frequent and widespread and are projected to increase alongside extreme rainfall events. 
World Bank, 2021, Ethiopia Climate Risk Profile. 
32 This is in addition to the estimated 5 million persons registered by NIDP at the time of project approval. 
33 Fees were calculated based on cost models by NIDP as part of project preparation, in line with the costs observed in other developing countries. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Digital ID for Inclusion and Services Project (P179040) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 39 
 
consumables and have the possibility of procuring kits (for example, banks). The fund flows will be elaborated in the Project 
Operations Manual. 
(b) Super agents. These are private companies procured through a competitive process. They will cover all geographies, 
including urban centers, nonurban, remote, and special zones/use cases benefiting from the private sector’s ability to scale 
operations. NIDP will provide registration kits, software, and training to ensure inclusion and nondiscrimination. The agents 
will provide facilities, staffing, and consumables and may use their own hardware that meet standards set by NIDP. 
(c) Fayda Centers. These are permanent, temporary, and mobile centers to be established and operated by NIDP, typically at 
regional and zonal levels, to offer registration, data update, and grievance services. For the initial mass registration, the focus 
will be on temporary and mobile centers for populations, such as those living in remote areas and persons with disabilities, who 
are unlikely to be covered by registration partners and super agents. Permanent centers will be gradually established, including 
through co-location with offices of ICS and other government agencies, to take over steady state responsibilities. 
(d) Civil registration. This channel involves Fayda registration at the time of birth registration for children below an age to be 
agreed by NIDP and ICS, facilitated by system-to-system integration. 
Figure 1. Fayda Registration and ID Issuance Channels 
 
 
 
 
Credentials 
The IDs issued by Fayda will use credentials that will use open technologies (for example, open standard QR codes) for security and 
verification (including with offline capabilities) and will not display data that could cause risk of discrimination. NIDP will also 
consider using global and regional standards for cross-border interoperability of the credentials. The two types of credentials are 
as follows: 
(a) Physical credentials. Low-cost plastic or paper ID cards with basic physical security features will be issued for free in the first 
instance with the possibility of charging nominal fees for replacements and for these fees to be waived for vulnerable 
populations. These credentials will be distributed through the registration channels and partnerships with EthioPost, 
regional governments, and kebeles. 
(b) Digital credentials. A Fayda smartphone application will be developed along with the issuance of digital credentials that can 
be stored in other applications and emerging standardized digital wallets. These credentials will be free for all to use. 
42. 
Kebele ID paper-based records are stored locally across the country, with no aggregated backups in a centralized 
repository. This makes them vulnerable to damage or loss during climate disasters or conflict.34 Recent floods in Somali, 
                                                          
34 Lucas, Kitzmüller. 2020. Let’s Get Digital? Policy Options for Ethiopia’s ID System. https://lucaskitzmueller.medium.com/lets-get-digital-policy-
options-for-ethiopia-s-id-system-ef2b02468942  
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Ethiopia Digital ID for Inclusion and Services Project (P179040) 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 39 
 
Oromia, and Afar have flooded fields, schools, and public institutions.35 The roll out of Fayda and the planned 
interoperability with civil registration will improve the Government’s ability to offer digital services that require proof of 
vital events, such as for emergency cash transfers following climate shocks (floods and drought)36.  The provision of unique 
identifier will assist the layering of services and support packages (cash plus) on climate change vulnerable households by 
various partners which will better facilitate building the resilience of households from the impact of climate change. 
43. 
Subcomponent 3.1 – Supporting mass registration and issuance of physical IDs to Ethiopian residents (US$190 
million IDA). This subcomponent will support a mass registration through registration partners, super agents, and Fayda 
centers to produce and distribute IDs to up to 90 million nationals and nonnationals, including disadvantaged groups, such 
as women, girls, and persons with disabilities (except for refugees and host communities, which are funded by 
Subcomponent 3.2). It will also support the transition to a steady state through the establishment of permanent Fayda 
centers. In line with the project’s commitment for inclusion, the registration strategies and processes will be designed to 
be universally accessible. The planned Fayda registration processes have been enhanced by pilots and are expected to be 
easy and accessible for Ethiopians and residents, with information available in a variety of formats and from a range of 
trusted sources. To avoid exclusion, the registrants will have the option to present many possible official documents, 
including a Kebele ID or birth certificate. Any persons without either of these or other identity documents, in the last 
resort, would have their claimed identity vouched for by a trusted ‘introducer.’ Funds will be used to support mass 
registration and issuance of physical and digital IDs to Ethiopian residents (excluding refugees and host communities) 
through registration partners, super agents, and Fayda centers as well as the establishment of permanent Fayda centers 
and registration partners. The project will promote the use of renewable energy by procuring solar-powered registration 
kits for the mass registration (90 million people). 37  
44. 
Subcomponent 3.2 – Supporting mass registration and issuance of physical IDs to Ethiopian residents in host 
communities and refugees (US$20 million WHR). This subcomponent will support NIDP, in collaboration with UNHCR and 
RRS, to prioritize registration and ID issuance, through registration partner and Fayda center channels, to host 
communities and refugees in regions where large populations of refugees exist, namely Gambella, Somali, Benishangul-
Gumuz, Afar, Tigray,38 and Amhara, as well as urban refugees in Addis Ababa. This is estimated to cover up to 1.7 million 
persons in host communities and up to 924,000 refugees.39 NIDP will work closely with RRS and UNHCR to utilize existing 
and upcoming initiatives for issuing and renewing refugee ID cards. This involves reusing biographic and biometric data 
collected by RRS through the UNHCR ProGres system for Fayda registration. NIDP will also develop registration strategies 
for individuals who require to be ‘introduced’ by a witness in the absence of supporting documentation (for example, due 
to delay in issuance of refugee cards). Fayda will not substitute existing documents issued to refugees (refugee ID card, 
proof of registration, and so on) but will be used as a complementary form of identification. 
                                                          
35 Floodlist 2023. Ethiopia-Flooding Continues in Several Regions, Displacing Thousands and Threatening Food Security. 
htps://floodlist.com/africa/ethiopia-floods-may-2023   
36 Governments must respond quickly to climate or other shocks and provide emergency assistance. When Pakistan was hit by floods in 2010, it used 
the foundational ID to facilitate emergency cash grants: beneficiaries used their cards to make a quick application at centers across the country, and 
their address was validated (to check whether they lived in the affected areas). Over 2.7 million people applied, but 1.1 million were deemed 
ineligible, saving up to US$248 million. Having such reliable systems enables a country to respond at speed and with transparency. 
37 The process will require thousands of registration kits.  
38 Numbers of refugees in Tigray require confirmation as RRS is currently in the process of re-engaging in the region following the recent conflict. 
39 The target for refugees tackles almost the whole population of registered refugees in Ethiopia as of October 2023. However, this number might change 
due to continuing inflows and outflows of refugees. The same is valid for the target seizure of the host community, which is until now an estimate 
provided by UNHCR, for woredas with a great number of host communities. It should be noted that the per-person cost of registering refugees is expected 
to be nearly three times that of host communities, which has been considered in the costing and allocations of WHR.