Document of 
The World Bank 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
 
Report No: PAD2108 
 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
 
 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT 
 
ON A 
 
PROPOSED CREDIT 
 
 
IN THE AMOUNT OF (SDR 236.4) MILLION REGULAR CREDIT 
(US$320 MILLION EQUIVALENT) 
AND  
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$125 MILLION SCALE UP FACILITY 
 
 
TO THE 
 
 
FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA 
 
 
FOR THE  
 
 
SECOND ETHIOPIA URBAN WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION PROJECT  
 
 
March 10, 2017 
 
 
Water Global Practice  
Africa Region 
  
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the 
performance of their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without 
World Bank authorization. 
 
 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
 
(Exchange Rate Effective February 28, 2017 
Currency Unit = 
Ethiopian Birr 
SDR 0.73861244 = 
US$1 
US$1.35389 = 
SDR 1 
 
FISCAL YEAR 
July 7 
– 
July 6 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
  
AAWSA 
Addis Ababa Water and Sewerage Authority 
CBO 
Community-Based Organization  
CSA 
Central Statistical Agency 
DB 
Design-Build 
DBO 
Design, Build, and Operate 
EFY 
Ethiopian Fiscal Year (EFY) 
ESIA 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
ESMF 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
ETB 
Ethiopian Birr  
FA 
Financing Agreement 
FM 
Financial Management 
FPMU 
Federal Project Management Unit 
GAP 
Gender Action Plan 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GoE 
Government of Ethiopia 
GTP 
Growth and Transformation Plan 
HR 
Human Resource 
ICB 
International Competitive Bidding 
ICT 
Information and Communication Technology 
IDA 
International Development Association 
IFR 
Interim Financial Report 
IRR 
Internal Rate of Return 
IUSMP 
Integrated Urban Sanitation Management Plan 
Km 
Kilometer 
LIA 
Low-Income Areas 
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
MDG 
Millennium Development Goal 
MIS 
Management Information System 
MoFEC 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation 
MoH 
Ministry of Health 
MoWIE 
Ministry of Water, Irrigation, and Electricity 
MTR 
Midterm Review 
M3 
NCB 
Cubic Meter 
National Competitive Bidding 
ii 
NPV 
Net Present Value 
NRW 
Nonrevenue Water 
NWSC 
National WaSH Steering Committee 
O&M 
Operation and Maintenance 
OWNP 
One WaSH National Program  
PDO 
Project Development Objective 
PIM 
Project Implementation Manual 
PIU 
Project Implementing Unit 
PMU 
Project Management Unit 
RPF 
Resettlement Policy Framework 
RWB 
Regional Water Bureau 
SCADA 
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
SDG 
Sustainable Development Goal 
SME 
Small and Medium Enterprise 
STEP 
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement 
SUF 
Scale up Facility 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
ToR 
Terms of Reference 
TSG 
Town Support Group 
TTL 
Task Team Leader 
UWSSP 
Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project 
WaSH 
Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene 
WRDF 
Water Resource Development Fund 
WSS 
Water Supply and Sanitation  
WWTP 
Wastewater Treatment Plant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regional Vice President:  
Makhtar Diop  
Country Director:  
Carolyn Turk 
Senior Global Practice Director:  
Guang Zhe Chen 
Practice Manager:  
Wambui G. Gichuri  
Task Team Leader:  
Yitbarek Tessema  
Tesfaye Bekalu 
iii 
ETHIOPIA 
 
SECOND ETHIOPIA URBAN WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION PROJECT  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Page 
 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...........................................................................................................1 
I.
A. Country Context ....................................................................................................... 1 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ........................................................................... 1 
C. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes ...................................... 6 
 
PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES ................................................................................6 
II.
A. PDO .......................................................................................................................... 6 
B. Project Beneficiaries ................................................................................................ 6 
C. PDO Level Results Indicators ................................................................................... 7 
 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION ........................................................................................................7 
III.
A. Project Components ................................................................................................ 7 
Project Cost and Financing........................................................................................... 11 
C. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design ........................................... 11 
 
IMPLEMENTATION ............................................................................................................12 
IV.
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .................................................. 12 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation ........................................................................ 14 
C. Sustainability .......................................................................................................... 14 
 
KEY RISKS ...........................................................................................................................15 
V.
A. Overall Risk Rating and Explanation of Key Risks .................................................. 15 
 
APPRAISAL SUMMARY ......................................................................................................16 
VI.
A. Economic and Financial Analysis ........................................................................... 16 
B. Technical ................................................................................................................ 18 
C. Financial Management .......................................................................................... 19 
D. Procurement .......................................................................................................... 20 
E. Social (including Safeguards) ................................................................................. 21 
F. Environment (including Safeguards) ...................................................................... 22 
G. Other Safeguard Policies ........................................................................................ 23 
H. World Bank Grievance Redress .............................................................................. 23 
iv 
Annex 1. Results Framework and Monitoring .............................................................................24 
Annex 2: Detailed Project Description .........................................................................................37 
Annex 3: Implementation Arrangements ....................................................................................48 
Annex 4:  Implementation Support Plan ......................................................................................75 
Annex 5: Economic and Financial Analysis ...................................................................................77 
Annex 6: Location Map .................................................................................................................86 
 
 
v 
PAD DATA SHEET 
Ethiopia 
Second Ethiopia Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project (P156433) 
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT 
AFRICA 
Water Global Practice 
Report No.: PAD2108 
Basic Information  
Project ID 
EA Category 
Team Leader(s) 
P156433 
B - Partial Assessment 
Yitbarek Tessema,Tesfaye 
Bekalu Wondem 
Lending Instrument 
Fragile and/or Capacity Constraints [   ] 
Investment Project Financing 
Financial Intermediaries [   ] 
 
Series of Projects [   ] 
Project Implementation Start Date 
Project Implementation End Date 
31-Mar-2017 
31-Dec-2022 
Expected Effectiveness Date 
Expected Closing Date 
31-Jul-2017 
07-Jul-2023 
Joint IFC 
 
 
No 
 
 
Practice 
Manager/Manager 
Senior Global Practice 
Director 
Country Director 
Regional Vice President 
Wambui G. Gichuri 
Guang Zhe Chen 
Carolyn Turk 
Makhtar Diop 
Borrower: Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation 
Responsible Agency: Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Electricity 
  Contact: 
Nuredin  Mohammed 
  Title: 
Director- Water Supply and Sanitation 
Directorate 
  Telephone No.: 251912205583 
  Email: nuredinmohammed@yahoo.com 
Project Financing Data(in USD Million) 
[   ] 
Loan 
[   ] 
IDA Grant [   ] 
Guarantee 
[ X ] 
Credit [   ] 
Grant 
[   ] 
Other 
Total Project Cost: 
505.00 
Total Bank Financing: 
445.00 
Financing Gap: 
0.00 
 
 
 
vi 
Financing Source 
Amount 
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
60.00 
International Development Association (IDA) 
445.00 
Total 
505.00 
Expected Disbursements (in USD Million) 
Fiscal Year 2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
 
Annual 
20.00 47.00 92.00 
102.00 
105.00 
54.00 
25.00 
 
Cumulative 20.00 67.00 159.00 
261.00 
366.00 
420.00 
445.00 
 
Institutional Data 
Practice Area (Lead) 
Water 
Contributing Practice Areas 
Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
The objective of the project is to increase access to enhanced water supply and sanitation services in an 
operationally efficient manner in Addis Ababa and selected Secondary Cities. 
Components 
Component Name 
Cost (USD Millions) 
Component 1: Sanitation and water supply services 
improvements in Addis Ababa 
260.00 
Component 2: Sanitation and water supply services 
improvement in secondary cities 
241.00 
Component 3: Project management & institutional 
strengthening 
4.00 
Total 
505.00 
Systematic Operations Risk- Rating Tool (SORT) 
Risk Category 
Rating 
1. Political and Governance 
High 
2. Macroeconomic 
Moderate 
3. Sector Strategies and Policies 
Substantial 
4. Technical Design of Project or Program 
Substantial 
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability 
Substantial 
6. Fiduciary 
Substantial 
7. Environment and Social 
Substantial 
8. Stakeholders 
Substantial 
9. Other (climate and disaster risk) 
Moderate 
OVERALL 
Substantial 
vii 
Compliance  
Policy 
Does the project depart from the CAS in content or in other significant 
respects? 
Yes [   ] 
No [ X ] 
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies? 
Yes [   ] 
No [ X ] 
Have these been approved by Bank management? 
Yes [   ] 
No [    ] 
Is approval for any policy waiver sought from the Board? 
Yes [   ] 
No [ X ] 
Does the project meet the Regional criteria for readiness for implementation? 
Yes [ X ] 
No [   ] 
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project 
Yes 
No 
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 
X 
 
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 
 
X 
Forests OP/BP 4.36 
 
X 
Pest Management OP 4.09 
 
X 
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 
X 
 
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 
 
X 
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 
X 
 
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 
 
X 
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 
X 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 
 
X 
Legal Covenants 
Name 
Recurrent 
Due Date 
Frequency 
Subsidiary Agreement. Schedule 2, 
Section I - B. 5 
 
30-Sep-2017 
 
Description of Covenant 
The Recipient, through MoWIE,  shall, prior to making available to AAWSA the portion of the proceeds 
of the Financing allocated from time to time to Category 1 of the table in  
Section IV.A.2 of Schedule 2 (“AAWSA Allocation”), enter into an agreement (“Subsidiary 
Agreement”) with AAWSA on terms and conditions acceptable to the Association. 
Name 
Recurrent 
Due Date 
Frequency 
Financing Agreement Reference: 
Schedule 2. Section I- B. 7 
X 
 
CONTINUOUS 
Description of Covenant 
The Recipient, through MoWIE, shall ensure that activities under Part 2 of the Project, which are to be 
carried out in Secondary Cities, are selected and approved in accordance with criteria and procedures, 
and under financing terms and conditions set forth in the Project Implementation Manual. 
 
 
viii 
Name 
Recurrent 
Due Date 
Frequency 
Audit of financial statements. (FA: 
Schedule 2.Section V- 1 (a) 
 
31-Oct-2017 
 
Description of Covenant 
Within two (2) months from the Effective Date, prepare in accordance with terms of reference 
acceptable to the Association and furnish to the Association for review, a report detailing the status of 
the preparation and audit of the entity financial statements of AAWSA and participating Secondary 
Cities water utilities, as well as a time-bound action plan for the preparation and audit of financial 
statements that have not been carried out in the past; and  
Thereafter, implement such action plan as shall have been approved by the Association and report the 
progress of implementation of said actions plan along with the interim unaudited financial reports under 
Section II.B.2 of Schedule-2. 
Conditions 
Source Of Fund 
Name 
Type 
IDA 
Project Implementation Manual 
Effectiveness 
Description of Condition 
The Recipient, through MoWIE (on behalf of the relevant Secondary Cities) and AAWSA, each has 
adopted the Project Implementation Manual in form and substance acceptable to the association. 
Team Composition 
Bank Staff 
Name 
Role 
Title 
Specialization 
Unit 
Yitbarek Tessema 
Team Leader 
(ADM 
Responsible) 
Lead Water and 
Sanitation 
Specialist 
Lead Water and 
Sanitation 
Specialist 
GWA08 
Tesfaye Bekalu Wondem Team Leader 
Sr Water & 
Sanitation Spec. 
Sr. Water and 
Sanitation 
Specialist 
GWA08 
Ayalew Kebede Belew 
Procurement 
Specialist (ADM 
Responsible) 
Senior Procurement 
Specialist 
Sr. Procurement 
Specialist 
GGO01 
Abiy Demissie Belay 
Financial 
Management 
Specialist 
Sr Financial 
Management 
Specialist 
Sr. Financial 
Management 
Specialist 
GGO25 
 
Team Member 
 
 
 
Amanuel Teshome 
Woldetsadik 
Team Member 
Consultant 
M&E-consultant 
GWA08 
Bereket Belayhun 
Woldemeskel 
Team Member 
Consultant 
Procurement - 
Consultant 
GGO01 
Bethelhem Teka 
Befekadu 
Team Member 
Team Assistant 
Team Assistant 
AFCE3 
Christiaan Heymans 
Team Member 
Sr Water & 
Sanitation Spec. 
Sr. Water and 
Sanitation 
Specialist 
GWAGP 
Chukwudi H. Okafor 
Safeguards 
Senior Social 
Sr. Social 
GSU07 
ix 
Specialist 
Development 
Specialist 
Development 
Specialist 
Gulilat Birhane Eshetu 
Team Member 
Sr Water & 
Sanitation Spec. 
Sr. Water and 
Sanitation 
Specialist 
GWA08 
Maiada Mahmoud Abdel 
Fattah Kassem 
Team Member 
Finance Officer 
Finance Officer 
WFALA 
Margaret Png 
Team Member 
Lead Counsel 
Lead Councel 
LEGAM 
Meseret Tsegaw 
Team Member 
Program Assistant 
Program Assistant 
GWA08 
Nadege Mertus 
Team Member 
Temporary 
Program Assistant 
GWA08 
Oliver Mark Jones 
Team Member 
Sr Water & 
Sanitation Spec. 
Sr. Water and 
Sanitation 
Specialist 
GWA08 
Ruth Jane Kennedy-
Walker 
Safeguards 
Specialist 
Young Professional Environment 
Specilialist- Young 
Professional 
GEN07 
Shimelis Woldehawariat 
Badisso 
Team Member 
Senior Procurement 
Specialist 
Sr. Procurement 
Specialist 
GGO01 
Tesfa Teferi 
Gebreegziabher 
Team Member 
Consultant 
Social Safeguards 
Specialist 
GWA08 
Tesfaw Ashagrie Zegale Team Member 
Consultant 
Environment 
Specialist 
GEN01 
Victoria Hilda Rigby 
Delmon 
Team Member 
Senior Counsel 
Senior Counsel 
GWA02 
Wendwosen Feleke 
Team Member 
Operations Officer Financial and 
Economic Analysis 
GWA08 
Yodit Teamir Rezene 
Team Member 
Team Assistant 
Team assistant 
AFCE3 
Yohannes Fisseha 
Team Member 
Consultant 
Technical 
Specialist 
GSU13 
Extended Team 
Name 
Title 
Office Phone 
Location 
Locations 
Country 
First 
Administrative 
Division 
Location 
Planned Actual 
Comments 
Ethiopia 
Oromiya 
Shashamane 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Oromiya 
Nek’emtē 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Oromiya 
Nazrēt 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Tigray 
Mek'ele 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Oromiya 
Jimma 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Somali 
Jijiga 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Amhara 
Gonder 
X 
 
 
x 
Ethiopia 
Amhara 
Dessie 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Somali 
Degeh Bur 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Oromiya 
Bishoftu 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Amhara 
Debre Birhan 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Amhara 
Bahir Dar 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
SNNPR 
Awasa 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Bīnshangul Gumuz Asosa 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Oromiya 
Āsela 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
SNNPR 
Arba Minch 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Tigray 
Ādīgrat 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Addis Ababa 
Addis Ababa 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Dire Dawa 
Dire Dawa 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Gambela 
Gambela 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Harari 
Harari 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
Āfar 
Semera 
X 
 
 
Ethiopia 
SNNPR 
Wolayta Sodo 
X 
 
 
 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT  
I.
A. Country Context 
 
1. 
Ethiopia has experienced rapid and stable economic growth over the past decade. From 2004 
to 2014, real gross domestic product (GDP) growth averaged 10.8 percent per year. This is the 
fastest growth that the country has experienced and is considerably above the average achieved by 
low-income and Sub-Saharan African countries during this period. Recent growth was also noticeably 
stable, as the country avoided the historical volatility brought by spells of drought and conflict, 
which plagued growth trends and prospects in the past. 
2. 
There has been a significant reduction in poverty, but challenges remain. Over the decade 
from 2004 to 2014, real GDP per capita increased on average by 8 percent per year. Poverty declined 
substantially from 55.3 percent in 2000 to 33.5 percent in 2011, based on the international poverty 
line of US$1.90 per/day. There has also been significant improvement in nutrition, health, education, 
and access to services. While experiencing this rapid growth, Ethiopia remained one of the most 
equal countries in the world with a Gini coefficient of consumption of 0.30 in 2011. However, 
despite this progress, the country ranked only 174 out of 188 in the human development index (HDI) 
of the United Nations Development Program (2015) and the poorest 15 percent of the population 
experienced a decline in well-being during 2005–2011, mainly as a result of higher food prices.   
3. 
The Government’s Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP) sets a goal of becoming a middle-
income country by 2025, with annual economic growth of 11.2 percent per year over the period and 
gross national income per capita reaching US$1,560 in 2025. A second phase of the GTP (GTP II - 
2015/16-2020/21) is currently under implementation. The Government has a powerful role in the 
economy, especially in priority sectors such as industry and agriculture, which are the key drivers of 
sustained economic growth and job creation.  
4. 
Decentralization of service delivery to local levels is actively pursued.  The current federal 
system of government was established in the early 1990s and since 2003, the country has 
decentralized service delivery responsibilities to the regional and district (woreda) levels. Critical 
public functions such as water and sanitation, solid waste management, and public health services 
have been devolved. Underlying this decentralized system is formula-based fiscal transfers.       
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
Sector context 
5. 
The sector context for urban water supply and sanitation (WSS) is best understood from 
three main perspectives: (a) rapid urbanization; (b) large-scale infrastructure investment and service 
delivery improvement requirements; and (c) a need for systematic policy and institutional 
transformation in urban and water sector governance.  
6. 
Structural transformation of the Ethiopian economy is driving rapid urbanization and 
increasing pressure on service provision, including for WSS. Urbanization is set to continue as the 
economy transforms from being predominantly rural and agriculture, to an increasingly urban 
society driven by manufacturing and services. The urbanization momentum is illustrated by the 
urban share of Ethiopia’s population, doubling from 8.5 percent in 1967 to 17.4 percent in 2012, and 
an annual average urbanization rate of 3.77 percent since 1996. Addis Ababa, by far the largest city 
in the country, has an estimated population of 3.35 million, which is expected to increase by about 
38 percent in 2030. This urban growth is recognized in the GTP II not only as an opportunity for 
sustained economic growth and structural transformation, but also as a challenge, including for the 
provision of WSS for the growing urban population.  
7. 
Ethiopia has made good progress in terms of extending access to water services.  In urban 
areas, 93 percent of households now have access to an improved source of drinking water, with a 
2 
significant increase from 10 percent to 56 percent having access to piped water on premise. This is 
significantly higher than the results achieved countrywide, still the 57 percent national coverage for 
water achieved in 2015, is in line with the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) target.   
8. 
The country fell far short of the MDG targets for sanitation though. Open defecation has been 
reduced significantly in urban areas (from 39 percent in 1990 to 6 percent in 2015).  However, for 
most households this has not translated into improved sanitation facilities. The numbers of public 
and communal latrines in urban areas fall far short of demand, leaving many low income people 
without latrine services.  In 2015, the percentage of people in urban areas with access to improved 
latrines had increased to just 27 percent from 20 percent in 1990, much lower than the Sub-Saharan 
Africa average of 40 percent. There has however been an increase in the use of shared latrines, from 
30 percent in 1990 to 40 percent in 2015, due in part to higher population density, and also because 
of the high prevalence of rented accommodation. Against the national MDG target of 57 percent, 
Ethiopia achieved only 28 percent sanitation coverage.   
9. 
Without improved services, cities are becoming increasingly polluted, which affects the 
quality of life, and could ultimately jeopardize economic growth. More than 60 percent of 
households in urban areas use traditional pit latrines and about 6 percent of urban residents are still 
practicing open defecation. Fecal sludge is often accumulated in poorly designed and built pits, and 
then discharged directly into storm drains, open water bodies or the ground, or manually removed 
and dumped into the neighborhood or the wider environment.1 The effect of all this is exposing 
urban residents to health hazards, as seen for example with a cholera outbreak in 2016. 
10. Responding to these challenges requires large-scale sanitation and water infrastructure 
investment, as well as systemic policy and institutional transformation.  Any city level investment 
strategy and related institutional support would need to focus on citywide impact and reach, but 
with specific measures to include low income residents. This demands responding to the lack of 
reliable water supply, especially in low income areas (LIAs); the protection of water sources; and 
thinking beyond conventional sewerage to pursue feasible, affordable options for onsite sanitation 
and fecal sludge management. Recent World Bank analyses2 have shown the importance of actively 
working towards inclusive city-wide sanitation, and within that framework, addressing and linking 
different stages of a “sanitation service chain” that cuts across collection, transportation, disposal 
and treatment of wastewater in poor urban areas. Failure to ensure such links throughout the 
service chain typically results in untreated fecal sludge contaminating the environment, with 
negative public health impacts. To set up such mechanisms along the service chain and provide the 
institutional system to carry it, requires clearly defined and organized delivery mechanisms, as well 
as mobilization and allocation of adequate fiscal resources. The urban WSS system in Ethiopia lacks 
such institutional mechanisms of adequate capacity.  
11. Institutional ambiguities and inefficiencies curtail service delivery improvements. Several 
sector reforms since the 1990s have introduced policies and institutional changes that have been 
associated with positive reforms in other parts of the world. Pivotal to this have been attempts to 
define and assign institutional accountability lines more clearly, and move towards cost recovery and 
other sustainable financing practices. There is wide acknowledgement, though, that much more is 
needed, including institutional reforms and substantial institutional and human resource (HR) 
capacity building.  No service provider is as yet able to sustain their service financially, and all still 
lack the necessary operational efficiency. Underpricing and high non-revenue water (NRW) 
undermine service levels. Although the water tariffs set by utilities are supposed to support a 
                                                 
 
1 Safe management of household excreta is defined as the containment, extraction, and transportation of excreta to a 
designated disposal or treatment site, or the safe re-use of excreta at the household or community level, as appropriate to 
the local context. 
2 World Bank 2016, Fecal Sludge Management: Diagnostics for Service Delivery in Urban Areas - Tools and Guidelines.  
3 
gradual move to full cost recovery, the fact that they need to be endorsed by the respective 
management board and approved by the region has reduced the incentives for full cost recovery and 
financial sustainability.   
12. A set of policies and strategies set priorities and provide directions for the sector 
development. The country’s water resources policy calls for efficient, equitable, and optimum 
utilization of water resources for sustainable socio-economic development.  It also highlights the 
need for WSS services to be integrated at all levels in a sustainable and coherent framework.  The 
Government is also following a strategy that responds to the capacity constraint and, promotes 
partnership between the public and private providers to pave the way for the move towards a longer 
term goal of efficient, universal and affordable service provision within a supporting policy and 
regulatory framework.  The federal government’s goal of ensuring that cities are open defecation 
free by 2020 requires thinking beyond conventional sewerage, which is expensive, even more so 
given the shortage of water, and the physical difficulty of developing services rapidly in densely 
populated areas. The Government’s draft Integrated Urban Sanitation and Hygiene Strategy 
emphasizes improving existing latrines and fecal sludge management, investing more in 
decentralized wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs), introducing wastewater reuse, and achieving 
safe wastewater management. Achieving the impact of these strategies is a long term process, but 
will lead to establishing stronger institutions with robust federal and regional level enabling 
frameworks, increasing access to WSS services, and improving the health and productivity of urban 
dwellers to enable them to play an active role in the country’s economic growth.  
 
Addis Ababa 
13. The largest concentration of people is in the capital city, Addis Ababa, where services are 
struggling to keep up with rising demand due to urbanization. The water coverage in the city is over 
90 percent, but supply is intermittent with some sub-cities having access to water for only 12 hours a 
day for less than three days per week.3  Coping with the demand from the extensive housing 
development in the city is a continuing challenge.4 Most residents use some form of on-site 
sanitation: Half of the residents use shared pit latrines, while about 18.3 percent and 26.4 percent, 
respectively, use private pit latrines or flush toilets, including pour flushing. The problems of open 
defecation; unsafe containment; and lack of appropriate desludging services, transportation and 
treatment of wastewater remains significant.  
14. Addis Ababa is the only city in Ethiopia with a sewerage network, although only about 10 
percent of the population has access to the sewerage services. Addis Ababa has three sewerage 
catchments (Akakai, Kality and Eastern). There are 20 existing treatment plants with 15 
decentralized WWTPs with conveyance and treatment capacity of 60,500 m3 per day under 
construction.5 The World Bank-supported Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Project (UWSSP-1), 
P101473, is financing expansion of the Kality sewerage system to add capacity of 90,000 m3 per day. 
This is due for completion in late 2017, but will not have adequate capacity to address the full 
demand. The strategy of the Addis Ababa Water and Sewerage Authority (AAWSA) is to construct 
and outsource mobile and fixed public and communal latrines in low income and public areas, but 
the rollout lags far behind demand. Desludging services - primarily pit emptying and transportation - 
                                                 
 
3 The findings of a recent socio economic survey of 4220 sampled households in 28 woredas of Addis Ababa indicate that 
the average access to water is about 16 hours per day, for about 5.4 days per week. Sub-cities such as Gulele receive water 
on average for 12 hours per day, for 2.2 days per week, while Kolfe Keraniyo receives water for 19 hours per day. 
4 So far 101,632 condominium houses have been transferred to the targeted households, of which 94,915 are for 
residential and 6,717 for business purposes. In the second GTP (2015/16-2020/21), the city planned to construct 350,000 
condominium houses for low and medium income level households. 
5 12 are completed (three have started operations) and three are under construction 
4 
are provided through AAWSA’s own 104 vacuum trucks; AAWSA also regulates a fleet of 58 private 
vacuum truck operators. A recent World Bank Group analysis6 found that the management and 
maintenance of these fleets are a major problem (only 62 percent are functional), and that safe 
management of excreta is not common. Reception facilities, such as Addis’s existing treatment 
plants in Kaliti and Kotebe, do not have adequate capacity to deal with the city’s volumes of sludge.   
15. AAWSA has undertaken reforms, but deep-rooted institutional problems remain in critical 
aspects of water services. The current billing system, for example, is labor intensive and its 
software, business processes and checks and balances are not in tune with the standards in well-
functioning utilities globally, including in Africa. At the moment 16 percent of the meter reading 
shows connected households to be using less than 1 m3 per month, which appears very low in 
comparison to utilities in other countries. Similarly, a lack of effective electronic systems and reliable 
data makes it impossible to respond to customer complaints effectively and to keep track of 
different customers.  This compromises the ability to do volumetric charging and optimize the 
revenue potential, for example, of large customers. The city institutions are stretched for financial 
and human resources and capacity to ensure that appropriate technological choices and systems for 
water and sanitation services are accessible.  
Secondary Cities 
16. The demand for improved sanitation services in the secondary cities is also growing fast. 
Currently, none of the secondary cities has a sewerage system. A limited number of municipalities in 
these cities have vacuum trucks to desludge latrines and septic tanks, but fleet management and 
operation is patchy, and mechanical failure is common. In some cases, private vacuum trucks 
operate side by side with the utility’s trucks, but coverage remains low. Sludge is mostly released 
into the environment without adequate treatment due to the absence of reception facilities. 
17. At the city level, multiple institutions are involved. Water and Sewerage entities in each 
municipality are legally mandated to provide wastewater services in the large cities, but 
municipalities are responsible for solid waste and storm water management. In most cases 
municipalities have not been able to coordinate sanitation services - wastewater, solid waste and 
storm water - effectively. The lack of coordination between solid waste and liquid waste services, as 
well as drainage, is a problem since these waste streams are often mixed together; for example 
drainage channels are contaminated with fecal waste, and are blocked by solid waste.  
18. Several areas are in need of capacity enhancement, including skills development, 
performance incentives, and overall, a more business oriented approach driven by a clear business 
plan with measurable targets. This applies to all functions and roles, from senior strategic 
leadership approaches and skills, to updating technical skills at the operational level, and developing 
greater ownership of the institutional agenda. Data are currently inadequate to present a clear NRW 
profile of the utilities, which makes it difficult to pinpoint the core of the problem. More transparent 
HR systems and databases will enable utilities to hold staff accountable for their performance on 
clearly assigned responsibilities.   
Institutional Context 
19. Water sector reforms have concentrated on establishing a decentralized enabling and 
operational environment for basic service delivery. Devolution of powers to regional governments 
in the 1990s provided Regional Water Bureaus (RWBs) with considerable autonomy over the 
development of water supply services, with the national government primarily tasked with policy, 
coordination and regulatory functions. A second wave of decentralization since 2004 entailed 
devolving service delivery responsibilities to the municipal and district (woreda) levels. 
                                                 
 
6 Source: Institutions and Service Provision of Urban Sanitation in  Addis Ababa (August 2016). 
5 
Subsequently, water utilities were also established in larger cities, with their own governing boards, 
and the expectation of becoming financially sustainable. They are also typically responsible for 
sewerage, but public health functions including hygiene and behavior change fall under the 
municipalities. This means that responsibility for sanitation does not reside in one institution at the 
city level.       
20. Different ministries and agencies have responsibilities pertaining to WSS services. The 
Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Electricity (MoWIE) is the lead institution responsible for policy, 
strategy and national program development and overall monitoring of the water sector at the 
national level. In cities, the water and sewerage utilities are responsible for provision of water 
supply, and are directly accountable to water boards, which are in turn partly regulated by RWBs. 
The Ministry of Works, Urban Development and Housing Construction also plays a part in monitoring 
the standard of municipal services, including water supply and solid waste.   
21. Institutional arrangements for urban sanitation are even more complex than those for water. 
Institutional fragmentation and unclear responsibilities have led to gaps in service provision. 
Inadequate coordination of planning, design, implementation and supervision often result in poor 
quality, delays in construction and incomplete asset management, as well as unclear division of roles 
between local governments and operators. MoWIE; the Ministry of Works, Urban Development and 
Housing Construction; and the Ministry of Health (MoH) share responsibilities for monitoring and 
oversight of hygiene and sanitation services at the national level which has made it more difficult to 
hold utilities accountable for improvements in service quality and coverage.  Each ministry tends to 
focus on its own mandate, as well as internal planning and management systems. 
22. Mechanisms or institutional capacity to enforce public health proclamations and pollution 
control regulation are weak, even though ’polluters pay’ principles have been adopted formally. 
The existing regulations mostly do not clearly define the minimum standards for services, and are 
mostly silent on the urban sanitation delivery chain of collection, transportation, treatment, and 
disposal. The capacity of institutions and functionaries responsible for regulation also requires 
attention.  
23. Private sector participation in WSS is limited. Water utilities and local governments have not 
harnessed the full potential of the private sector to improve the efficiency of service provision. This 
is in part because a conducive enabling environment for private sector participation is not in place. 
There are some examples of private engagement in the emptying and transportation of domestic 
waste, but to build on them, contract management skills need to be developed in municipalities and 
utilities, and the legal frameworks for engaging private partners have to be clarified and refined.  
24. The involvement of development partners in urban WSS is limited to a few financiers, of 
which the World Bank’s share is the largest. Through its WSS projects, the World Bank has brought 
international knowledge to the sector, such as on the creation of autonomous water utilities, and 
has served as a platform to leverage resources from other development partners. The proposed 
project will be a continuation and expansion of the World Bank’s long term engagement in the 
sector and support to the efforts of the Government of Ethiopia (GoE) to improve urban sanitation 
services. The Water Supply Development and Rehabilitation Project (1996 – 2003) initiated – in 
addition to a US$65.5 million investment in water supply infrastructure – sector dialogue and 
institutional reform, mainly the creation of autonomous city water utilities. The Water Supply and 
Sanitation Project (WSSP), co-financed by the U.K. Department for International Development in 
2004 –2013, helped scale up these reforms to 203 woredas and 87 cities, supporting 
decentralization and a demand- driven approach, efficiency enhancement and business planning, 
and a move from a project-focused to a performance based, programmatic approach. The current 
Urban Water Supply and, Sanitation Project (P101473) has stepped up support for operational 
efficiency improvement, performance agreements, and piloting approaches for services for the 
urban poor in the LIAs. The Sustainable and Equitable Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WaSH) 
6 
Services Project (P157690) (2016-2018) has assisted the Government in operationalizing WaSH 
policies and institutional structures to pursue equitable water supply, security and safety; and 
sustainable access and use of sanitation and hygiene services at scale.  
  
C. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes 
 
25. The proposed project aligns fully with the GTP II urban development agenda, which regards 
urban centers as key economic agents, and identifies addressing infrastructure gaps as a major 
priority alongside job creation and housing. It specifically calls for expansion of sustainable potable 
water supply and improving urban sanitation. The project objectives and components are also 
consistent with Ethiopia’s international commitments, including Sustainable Development Goal 
(SDG) 6 and SDG 117.  
26. The proposed design is also aligned with the World Bank Group's draft Country Partnership 
Framework (CPF)8 FY18-FY21 which is under preparation, and the Systematic Country Diagnostic 
(SCD) which has informed the Country Partnership Strategy process. Building on the lessons from the 
World Bank’s just completed Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) (2013-2016) for Ethiopia that 
emphasizes increased access to and improved quality of infrastructure services, in particular water 
supply and sanitation, the SCD calls for ‘getting urbanization right’, with improved infrastructure 
services to support economic growth, competitiveness and job creation, and resilience and reducing 
vulnerability.   
  
 
PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES 
II.
A. 
PDO  
27. The objective of the project is to increase access to enhanced water supply and sanitation 
services in an operationally efficient manner in Addis Ababa and selected secondary cities.    
B. 
Project Beneficiaries  
28. The main project beneficiaries are expected to be 3.38 million people (50 percent of them 
women) residing in Addis Ababa and the selected 22 secondary cities. Of these, 2.76 million will 
benefit from improved sanitation facilities and 623,000 from access to improved water supply 
services. Service providers will benefit from operational and efficiency improvements, whereas local 
governments and communities as a whole will gain from enhanced services and cleaner 
environments.  
29. The project will facilitate the creation of job opportunities for women and youth through 
economic opportunities related to the management and operation of water and sanitation service 
delivery, including the outsourcing of the management of public sanitation facilities to local youth 
groups. Poor households, the most vulnerable, will be targeted particularly to benefit from such 
opportunities at public and communal latrines. 
 
                                                 
 
7 SDG 6 is “ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all” and includes targets for 
adequate and equitable sanitation and for substantially improving water use efficiency by 2030. SDG 11 is “making cities 
inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable”, which includes targets by 2030 to ensure access for all to: adequate, safe and 
affordable housing and basic services, and to upgrade slums”. 
8 The Country Management Unit is developing the Country Partnership Framework to guide the World Bank Group’s 
engagement in the coming years. 
7 
C. 
PDO Level Results Indicators 
30. The following indicators will be used to measure progress toward achieving the Project 
Development Objective (PDO). 
1. People in urban areas whose excreta is safely managed under the project (number) 
2. People in urban areas with access to improved water sources under the project (number) 
(Core) 
3. Operation cost -coverage ratio (ratio) 
4. Savings from NRW interventions under the project (m3/year) 
5. Direct project beneficiaries, of which percent are female (number) (Core) 
 
 PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
III.
A. 
Project Components  
31. The project is designed to support service providers in Addis and select secondary cities move 
towards a longer term goal of efficient, universal and affordable service provision within a 
supporting policy and regulatory framework. This is a decade or longer process, but by the end of 
the project, it is expected that Addis Ababa and the participating cities will have increased access to 
WSS services, and will have contributed to improving the health and productivity of urban dwellers 
to enable them to play an active role in the country’s economic growth. Institutional strengthening 
will secure more robust federal and regional level enabling frameworks and support, while the 
participating utilities will be assisted to become more business oriented, with measurable business 
plans, adequate human and operating capacity and data systems to provide WSS services effectively.  
32. The project will support the Government’s effort to respond to the increasing urban demand 
through investments in sanitation infrastructure, and engaging private operators to improve O&M of 
the facilities. There will also be activities to improve WSS services levels by facilitating the 
establishment of institutional arrangements for modernizing the operational and management 
systems of utilities in Addis Ababa and the selected secondary cities. While equity was taken into 
consideration in the selection of the participating cities, the project will be implemented following a 
stepped approach9 which requires utilities to acquire the capacity to plan, implement and manage 
the WSS services to meet the eligibility criteria for accessing investment financing. 
Component 1: Sanitation and water supply services improvements in Addis Ababa (US$260 million 
equivalent).  
33. The project will finance the construction of sanitation facilities in various settlements and socio 
economic situations and will seek to implement appropriate cost-effective sanitation options. These 
options include a centralized WWTP covering the eastern catchment with an estimated daily 
capacity of 80,000 m3, a trunk line of 43 km and 96 km secondary lines which are expected to serve 
about one-third of the Addis population in the expanding areas of the city. There will also be support 
for appropriate household sanitation facilities, decentralized sewerage systems for condominium 
housing sites, fecal sludge management facilities and transfer stations for densely populated LIAs, 
and household sanitation facilities in areas without connections to the sewerage system.  
Subcomponent 1.1: Sanitation services improvement in Addis Ababa (U$224.6 million equivalent).  
34. This subcomponent will entail the following: (a) sanitation assessments, feasibility studies, and 
the design and construction of a WWTP for the eastern catchment, through a design, build and 
operate (DBO) approach10; (b) sewerage networks for the eastern catchment; (c) improvement of 
                                                 
 
9 The stepped approach is  detailed in Figure 2.3 in Annex 2. 
10 DBO procurement streamlines the design-build (DB) delivery approach with a single private contractor designing, 
constructing and operating a new facility.  The advantages of this approach are lower capital and maintenance costs, use of 
8 
operation and maintenance (O&M) management of existing WWTPs; (d) improvement of sanitation 
services in unserved and LIAs, including construction of communal and public latrines; and (e) 
procurement of appropriate desludging equipment for fecal sludge treatment plants. 
Subcomponent 1.2: Operational efficiency improvements in Addis Ababa (US$33.1 million 
equivalent).  
35. This subcomponent will support AAWSA to improve WSS services levels by modernizing the 
operational and management system, including: (a) NRW reduction and management; (b) customer 
care; (c) financial management (FM); (d) network management; and (e) improving sewer 
connections and fleet management systems. The project will also support management contracts to 
fill O&M capacity gaps and establish effective management systems, including performance-based 
contracts for small-scale leak detection and repair. Critical areas will include business plans and 
performance agreements to focus on: (a) implementation of operational processes and performance 
improvements; (b) HR improvements and change management; (c) a comprehensive Supervisory 
Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system to secure supervisory control and data acquisition; (d) 
ability to analyze real-time data; and (e) a dedicated operator support to assist AAWSA to translate 
high-level plans to action.  
Subcomponent 1.3: Project management and institutional strengthening in Addis Ababa (US$2.3 
million equivalent).  
36. AAWSA’s existing project management capacity will be supplemented through additional staff 
before the start of the project and during implementation to enhance the capacity of the 
management board and utility staff to manage WSS facilities effectively. This assistance will cover 
the cost of training on project implementation and utility operations, regional, international, and in-
country exposure visits and learning exchanges, procuring office equipment and vehicles, and 
miscellaneous expenses. 
 
Component 2: Sanitation and water supply services improvement in secondary cities (US$241 
million equivalent).  
37. Under this component, 22 cities selected from all the regional states and the Dire Dawa city 
administration will be supported. The interventions in the selected cities will be incremental and 
open to mixed approaches, rather than single solutions.  The starting point is to address the problem 
of open defecation, followed by improving and systematizing fecal sludge management and 
ultimately to assist with investment in sewer systems where feasible. Separate feasibility studies and 
detailed designs will be developed for each city to determine the appropriate technological solutions 
for their specific contexts. This component will finance (a) feasibility studies, detailed design, and 
construction of wastewater management systems for all secondary cities utilities; (b) development 
of an integrated city sanitation plan for all 22 cities; (c) design and construction of 800 communal 
and public latrines; and (d) procurement of different capacity vacuum trucks. Activities under 
Subcomponents 2.2 and 2.3 will include (a) development/updating of 22 secondary cities utility 
business plans; (b) a study for improving billing and accounting systems of these secondary cities 
utilities; (c) feasibility studies and detailed designs of water supply system for selected utilities; (d) 
selection and employment of PIU key staff; and (e) supply of field vehicles for utilities.  
 
Subcomponent 2.1: Sanitation services improvement in secondary cities (US$196 million 
equivalent)  
                                                                                                                                                        
 
robust technology and equipment, shorter delivery schedules, and a single contract. DBO risks include weak supervision 
and too much upfront pricing, with long-term operational requirements left vague. 
9 
38. This subcomponent will finance studies and design, technical assistance (TA) and infrastructure 
development. This support will improve fecal sludge management facilities and conventional sewer 
systems

[... procurement/fiduciary sections omitted ...]

 also support the establishment of utility 
performance monitoring and benchmarking, and the preparation of business plans. Project 
management costs will include communications, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), procurement, 
FM, safeguards, and other functions. Institutional development will also cover: (a) establishment of 
work systems and the development of guidelines and manuals; (b) procurement of vehicles, relevant 
instruments and tools; and (c) staff training. 
Component 3: Project management and institutional strengthening (US$4 million equivalent)  
41. This subcomponent will help MoWIE and RWBs manage the project and strengthen their 
institutional capacity, and will include short term training, study tours, and carefully planned 
acquisition of office equipment; and vehicles. This component will also finance several studies to 
support improvements in sector performance, such as options for private participation; data 
collection and monitoring systems related to performance-based agreements, monitoring and 
benchmarking; the establishment of independent bodies to regulate utility performance; and 
emerging needs for applied research, technology choice, waste reuse, and other topics (see Annex 2, 
Component 3).  
B. Project Financing 
42. The estimated project cost is US$505 million, to be financed by a combination of IDA credit 
(US$320 million), IDA Scale Up Facility (SUF) Credit (US$125 million) and US$60 million from 
counterpart funding by the Addis Ababa City Administration (see Table 1). The Scale Up Facility is a 
one-off facility to provide additional support to eligible IDA clients for the remainder of the IDA17 
period. The GoE will channel US$170 million to AAWSA in the form of a sub-loan and US$30 million 
in the form of grant. The credit proceeds for secondary city utilities will be passed on either as a 
10 
grant or credit, depending on presentation of acceptable business plans and project proposals by 
each utility.    
 
 
11 
Project Cost and Financing 
Table 1: Project Cost by Component 
Project Components 
Project 
Cost 
IDA Regular 
Financing 
IDA 
Scale 
Up Facility 
GoE 
Contribution 
% of IDA 
Financing 
1. Component 1: Sanitation and water supply services improvements in Addis Ababa 
1.1 Sanitation services improvement in 
Addis Ababa. 
224.6 
39.6 
125.0 
60.0 
73 
1.2. Operational efficiency improvement 
in Addis Ababa. 
33.1 
33.1 
0 
0 
100 
1.3 Project management and institutional 
strengthening in Addis Ababa 
2.3 
2.3 
0 
0 
100 
Total Component 1 
260.0 
75.0 
125.0 
60.0 
77 
2. Component 2: Sanitation and water supply services improvements in secondary cities 
2.1 Sanitation services improvement in 
secondary cities 
196.0 
196.0 
0 
0 
100 
2.2. Water supply and operational 
efficiency improvement in secondary cities 
36.8 
36.8 
0 
0 
100 
2.3. Project management and institutional 
development in secondary cities 
8.2 
8.2 
0 
0 
100 
Total Component 2 
241.0 
241.0 
0 
0 
100 
3. Component 3: Project management and 
institutional strengthening  
4.0 
4.0 
0 
0 
100 
Total Costs 
505.0 
320.0 
125.0 
60.0 
88 
Note: a The cost estimates include 15 percent price and physical contingencies.  
b The utilities and city administrations will mobilize additional resources if the cost of the appropriate technology exceeds 
the resource allocated for them under the project.  
C IDA original SDR amount for the US$125m SUF is SDR 92,400,000. 
 
C. 
Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
43. The project design has been informed by lessons learned from the on-going UWSSP-1 
(P101473); the Ethiopia Local Government Development Project II (P133592); and from international 
experience captured in a major World Bank report published in 2016: Fecal Sludge Management: 
Diagnostics and Guidelines for Service Delivery in Poor Urban Areas (P146128). The design has also 
drawn on two current World Bank analytical tasks in Ethiopia: Support to Government of Ethiopia to 
Improve Urban and Small Town Sanitation Service Management (P151356) and Sustainable and 
Equitable WaSH Services in Ethiopia (P157690). Some of the key lessons reflected in UWSSP-2’s 
design are listed:  
(a) Decentralizing responsibility for service delivery can lead to improved effectiveness, but 
requires institutional strengthening efforts at all levels. It is important to have or build 
the necessary capacity and systems at all levels to be responsive to community needs and 
be accountable for policies, actions, and use of funds. The rules of the game also need to 
be respected, so that local institutions are able to levy tariffs that enable them to provide 
effective services. UWSSP-2’s design includes a strong set of interventions to support 
institutional strengthening at the local level, as well as to help develop relations with the 
higher tiers. 
(b) Coordination among public institutions is important, which is contingent on clear roles 
and responsibilities at the outset between different tiers of government and also in the 
relationships between institutions at each level of government. UWSSP-2’s design 
recognizes that utilities are part of a bigger institutional system, especially in the case of 
12 
urban systems with multiple stakeholders, and seeks to help the GoE secure clear roles 
and coordinate institutions.    
(c) A stepped approach is appropriate to ensure sustainable service delivery. The project 
will help improve utilities’ technical, financial, and operational capacity in a sequenced 
manner to ensure absorption and effective use of project investment resources while 
ensuring sustainability of service delivery (See Annex 2).  
(d) Consultations are important when demand for improved sanitation is low.  Low 
demand for sanitation is due to among other things low levels of awareness of the 
benefits of safe sanitation, as well as affordability issues amid considerable poverty, lack 
of space in dense urban settings, predominantly rental housing. In UWSSP-2, improved 
consultation with the community will help motivate behavior change and market the 
benefits of improved sanitation to increase the demand for services. 
(e) Ensuring sufficient household demand for connections to sewer systems is key.  Low 
interest in connections to the sewer system potentially poses serious challenges.  This can 
be addressed by a clear policy and regulatory framework, enforcement mechanisms and 
communication strategies developed and communicated upfront, with adequate lead 
time. These aspects are embedded in UWSSP-2’s design.  
(f) 
Combining water supply and wastewater services in one institution improves efficiency, 
both functionally and for billing and operational efficiency purposes. Subcomponent 1.2 
will engage in these issues.   
(g) Stakeholder consultation and involvement are central to successful service delivery. 
Service delivery is more effective and sustainable when stakeholders are consulted and 
the roles and responsibilities for actors, including the private sector, are clearly defined. 
UWSSP-2’s design hence emphasizes stakeholder engagement.     
(h) Using existing government structures provides traction and enhances ownership, and 
embeds capacity and incentive systems. This can be complemented productively by 
contracted staff in specific areas. Local town support groups (TSGs) established under the 
Ethiopia Water Supply and Sanitation Project and in the on-going One WaSH National 
Program (OWNP) have also helped build utilities’ capacity through on-the-job and 
practical training. UWSSP-2 will draw on these resources to help establish a network of 
practitioners to facilitate the exchange of good practice in improving sector performance.  
(i) 
An M&E communication strategy is important. When sector data collection, analysis and 
dissemination are inadequate, the availability and accessibility of information becomes a 
constraint for planning and development in the water sector. UWSSP-2’s design therefore 
provides for a concerted, well-financed effort to implement and refine the proposed M&E 
system, and improve and communicate the data clearly as part of customer and citizen 
engagement.  
 IMPLEMENTATION 
IV.
A. 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements  
44.  UWSSP-2 implementation arrangements will largely follow the mechanisms of the on-going 
UWSSP-1, with slight modifications to capture recent developments. A Project Implementation 
Manual (PIM) will be developed before project effectiveness to outline detailed steps and 
procedures, as well as the institutional and implementation arrangements and the rules of 
engagement for planning, appraisal, contracting and implementation. Standard operating 
procedures, forms, bidding documents for works, and terms of reference (ToR) for consultants will 
be incorporated into the PIM. 
45. The project will introduce DBO contracts to engage experienced operators, thus minimizing 
the interface risk between the design, construction and operation stages, bringing innovation, and 
supporting training of utility staff. It will also support the establishment and strengthening of O&M 
systems.   
13 
 
 
Figure 1: Institutional Arrangements 
 
 
Note: WRDF = Water Resource Development Fund. 
46. To ensure that the project benefits the most disadvantaged, an appropriate targeting 
approach has been established. It will include: (a) creating opportunities for groups of women and 
unemployed youth, organized under small and micro enterprises, to manage and operate public 
toilets; (b) adopting affordable and simple technologies that can be replicated at the community and 
household levels; (c) locating public toilets at strategic places with concentration of people (for 
example, bus terminals, markets, public spaces and religious activity centers); and (d) investing in 
affordable and safely positioned public pay-and-use toilets and showers in LIAs, to be managed by 
women and youth-led community based organizations (CBOs).  
47. The institutional arrangements will involve several role-players. The highest governing body 
of the project is the NWSC that constitutes MoWIE as Chair, and includes the MoH, Ministry of 
Education, and Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation (MoFEC). The NWSC leads the 
dialogue on the sector and service delivery standards, resource mobilization and financing, and 
M&E. The Water and Sanitation Directorate and the Federal Project Management Unit (FPMU) 
within MoWIE will directly be responsible for the implementation of the project in the secondary 
cities outside Addis Ababa. The project office at AAWSA will be responsible for all activities in Addis 
Ababa. Figure 1 illustrates the key actors that will be involved in the UWSSP-2 implementation.  
48. Responsibility for the development and provision of WSS services in urban areas is a task 
shared among the utilities and local governments. Generally, water utilities are responsible for the 
provision of water and sewerage services, while local governments are responsible for collecting and 
safely disposing solid waste. Though the MoH has the overarching shared responsibility on hygiene 
and sanitation (including guidance on approach, oversight role, and the relevant methodological 
tools), the health departments in each project city are responsible for hygiene promotion. Details of 
the roles and responsibilities of project institutions are provided in Annex 3.  
 
City - 1
City - 2
City - 3
Utility - 1 
Utility - 3
Utility - 2 
MoWIE 
WRDF 
RWB 
AAWSA 
MoFEC 
National & 
International TA  
TSGs
National WaSH Steering Committee (NWSC) 
Legend    
   Implementation Responsibilities                              TA 
Subsidiary/loan agreement
14 
B. 
Results Monitoring and Evaluation  
49. The M&E system will complement the performance-based, phased approach. It will also draw 
on lessons from UWSSP-1. Annex 1 elaborates on results monitoring.  
50. Responsibility for M&E of progress toward achievement of the PDO is assigned at the federal, 
regional, and city levels. At the federal level, overall responsibility for M&E will lie with MoWIE. 
AAWSA will produce performance reports (financial and technical) for Component 1. Every quarter, 
project performance reports (financial and technical) will be prepared both by MoWIE and AAWSA 
no later than 45 days after the end of the reporting period. RWB and utilities of secondary cities will 
each appoint a dedicated M&E staff member who will be responsible for the coordination of M&E 
activities. 
51. The baseline data on selected indicators for WaSH will be taken from utility performance 
indicators. These include impacts on customers, operational performance, and financial 
performance. Progress on these indicators will be updated annually by the participating utilities. Job 
opportunities that will be created for women and youth under UWSSP-2 will be documented as part 
of periodic implementation reports.  
52. Capacity needs assessments will be conducted to inform the TA under Component 3 to 
strengthen data collection and M&E capacities at all levels, including refresher and on-the- job 
training in M&E for federal and regional PMUs and M&E staff.  The M&E system will be fine-tuned 
continuously through deliberation and as training progresses to build local capacity. 
53. The midterm review (MTR) at the end of the third year of implementation will assess the 
overall performance of the project and its progress toward achieving the development objectives. It 
will also assess the efficiency and effectiveness of project design and implementation and highlight 
the need for any adjustments. User satisfaction surveys at the MTR stage and at project completion 
will cover household satisfaction with the functioning, continuity, maintenance, and affordability of 
WSS services, and whether wastewater and wastewater reuse are perceived as safely managed. 
 
C. Sustainability  
54. Experience has shown that the impact of multiple social, economic, technical, institutional, or 
environmental factors over time may influence the sustainability of urban WSS services. Based on 
lessons learned from similar projects, UWSSP-2’s design will work toward strengthening and 
supporting the sustainability of systems through involving beneficiary communities and 
strengthening the participation and roles of women in all stages of project design and 
implementation. Beneficiary selection will be based on targets set by AAWSA and the local 
governments, verified by robust social and technical analysis. UWSSP-2 will actively seek to increase 
accountability by helping institutionalize public reporting of the performance of service providers on 
a regular basis.  
55. Strengthening the units responsible for post-construction support will be important, together 
with supporting the enabling environment for active participation of the private sector and small and 
micro enterprises to support O&M. This will be supported by periodic refresher training.   
56. Appropriate technologies will be deployed, such as for cost effective, simplified, wastewater 
containment, collection, transportation, safe treatment, and disposal/reuse. 
57. To ensure financial and economic long-term sustainability of the sector, the project will 
support implementation of the GoE’s cost recovery policy, partly on some of the activities in Addis 
Ababa, promoting community contribution and cost sharing in the design of urban sanitation 
services. It will also support activities to improve operational efficiency of urban water supply by 
financing activities and incentive mechanisms to reduce system losses through leak detection 
15 
programs, metering of consumers and encouraging conservation, streamlining sector institutions, 
and adopting modern management methods for the services. 
 
 
KEY RISKS  
V.
A. Overall Risk Rating and Explanation of Key Risks 
58. The overall implementation risk of the project is substantial.  
59. Political and governance risks are rated high because of the recently declared state of 
emergency and political unrest. The political situation appears to be improving, which may result in 
lifting the state of emergency. However, a resurgence of the unrest would impede implementation 
progress. The process of tariff revisions also carries political risk, as political and social factors may 
delay or even prevent tariff increases, which in turn could add to financial risk. AAWSA’s proposed 
tariff revision is currently under review by the managing board and it will inform how and when 
MoWIE and the utilities of the project secondary cities take action on tariff revisions or mobilization 
of alternative resources to cover potential financing gaps. 
60. Sector Strategies and Policies risks are rated substantial.  The existing WSS sector policy and 
strategy are over 15 years old and needs updating to address emerging urban sanitation challenges 
resulting from urbanization and rapid population growth. The project will finance sector reviews and 
studies to provide evidence on performance and effectiveness of policy provisions and share 
experiences from other countries to help the government in its effort to update the sector policies.   
61. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability/Fiduciary Risks (Substantial). 
Limited capacity and experience of selected secondary cities on implementation and management of 
urban sanitation could substantially affect implementation progress and effective operationalization 
of the facilities. Most of the participating cities have weak capacity in financial management and 
procurement that could substantially affect implementation. The project will require availability of 
critical fiduciary staffs and finance capacity building at every level to support FM, procurement, 
contract management, and safeguards, and to put in place improved systems for M&E.  An 
implementation support team will be engaged, including international and national experts in 
selected skill areas, while the TSGs will provide roaming TA. 
62. Technical Design of Project (Substantial). There are several design risks worth noting. Limited 
experience in the design and management of WWTPs may affect AAWSA, especially in technical 
design, operation, maintenance, and management of the WWTPs to be supported by the project. To 
mitigate this risk, the project will promote private sector participation through the introduction of 
DBO contracts and performance based service improvement.  A low demand for sewer connections, 
due to limited awareness and affordability constraints among targeted beneficiaries, poses a risk of a 
low connection rate and underutilization of facilities. To mitigate this, UWSSP-1 is supporting the 
establishment of an affordable connection strategy and regulations. UWSSP-2 will build on this and 
refine the strategy and regulations, while operational efficiency improvement activities will continue 
supporting a dedicated team at AAWSA to interact with the community and customers on a 
proactive plan for increasing connections. 
63. Stakeholder risks (Substantial). The involvement of various ministries and bureaus in the 
planning, implementation, management and regulation of urban water and sanitation, and the lack 
of adequate coordination among these stakeholders may pose substantial risk to project 
implementation. The project will support efforts to better define sanitation responsibilities and 
establish a coordination mechanism. At the national and regional level the WaSH steering 
committees will have oversight role and facilitate coordination among various actors while the city 
administration will facilitate coordination at city level.  The project will promote continuous dialogue 
as well as engagement of stakeholders during design and implementation of the project. The ‘Not in 
My Backyard’ syndrome poses risk due to low-income households’ limited awareness of the risk of 
