The World Bank
Djibouti: Sustainable Electrification Program (P158505)
REPORT NO.: RES34694
RESTRUCTURING PAPER
ON A
PROPOSED PROJECT RESTRUCTURING
OF
DJIBOUTI: SUSTAINABLE ELECTRIFICATION PROGRAM
APPROVED ON JUNE 2, 2017 
TO
THE REPUBLIC OF DJIBOUTI
ENERGY AND EXTRACTIVES
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Regional Vice President:
Ferid Belhaj 
Country Director:
Marina Wes
Senior Global Practice Director:
Riccardo Puliti
Practice Manager/Manager:
Erik Magnus Fernstrom 
Task Team Leader:
Emmanuel Py 
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
The World Bank
Djibouti: Sustainable Electrification Program (P158505)
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
EDD: Electricité de Djibouti (national electric utility)
The World Bank
Djibouti: Sustainable Electrification Program (P158505)
  
BASIC DATA
Product Information 
Project ID
Financing Instrument
P158505
Investment Project Financing
Original EA Category
Current EA Category
Partial Assessment (B)
Partial Assessment (B)
Approval Date
Current Closing Date
02-Jun-2017
05-Dec-2023
Organizations
Borrower
Responsible Agency
Ministry of Economy and Finance
Electricite de Djibouti
Project Development Objective (PDO)
Original PDO
The proposed Project Development Objective is to increase access to electricity in the targeted Project Area.
Summary Status of Financing 
Ln/Cr/Tf
Approval 
Signing Effectiveness 
Closing
Net
Commitment Disbursed Undisbursed
IDA-60690
02-Jun-2017
14-Jun-2017
11-Jan-2018
05-Dec-2023
23.30
2.11
21.78
Policy Waiver(s)
Does this restructuring trigger the need for any policy waiver(s)?
No
  
The World Bank
Djibouti: Sustainable Electrification Program (P158505)
I. PROJECT STATUS AND RATIONALE FOR RESTRUCTURING
1.
Project status: The project was approved by the Bank in June 2017. It is a national level electricity access project 
that will increase Djibouti’s electricity connections by 13,960 from its level of about 52,000 in 2016 – an increase of 
27 percent in electricity connections nationwide. The project is expected to connect on its own 11.5 percent of the 
country’s population of 850,000.
2.
The project is financed by a US$23.3 million IDA credit (IDA-60690), of which US$2.11 million (9 percent) has been 
disbursed to date. US$250,000 is committed and an additional US$1.5 million should be committed by April 2019. 
Cumulative disbursements at the end of FY19 would be expected to reach US$ 2.5 to 3 million. Several equipment 
lots have already arrived, but others may take up to a year to be delivered. Two large contracts for goods, totaling 
about US$12 million (almost 50 percent of the project financing), are planned as International Competitive Bidding 
(ICB) and will be subject to Bank’s prior review. The bidding documents for these two contract packages are expected 
to be submitted in late May 2019. These procurements would cover all equipment needed until the end of the 
project. However, the Government of Djibouti is keen to accelerate electricity access, and therefore the team is 
proposing this restructuring to accommodate their request.
3.
Rationale for restructuring: The overall purpose of the proposed restructuring is to respond to the Borrower’s 
request received on February 18, 2019 to accelerate project implementation by using the available stock of 
Electricité de Djibouti (EDD – Djibouti’s electricity utility). The reason is that the construction of about 500 social 
houses was finished recently, and their new inhabitants do not have access to electricity despite their proximity to 
the medium-voltage grid. More social houses (some 2,000) are being built and would need to be connected in 2019. 
Thus, the proposed restructuring would add an activity to Component 1 - Extension and Densification of Distribution 
Systems - to finance goods/materials (for maintenance and repairs) in EDD’s stock. The idea would thus be to allow 
EDD to use their available stock (which the Bank team has checked during its September 2018 mission) for the 
project’s urgent connections and then replenish it with this activity once the large equipment contracts of $12 
million are received. This activity was already included in the approved project procurement plan / PPSD. There will 
be a cap of US$2.5 million for this financing of goods and materials for EDD’s stock for repair and maintenance.
4.
Project targets (in particular, beneficiary connections) will not be adjusted as the utility confirmed that they aim to 
connect 13,960 new households under the project.
5.
Upon delivery of the equipment, EDD will be asked to identify and account separately goods and materials for EDD’s 
stock to ensure such goods and materials for EDD’s stock are used for repair and maintenance only. In terms of the 
Bank’s due diligence, the Bank team will supervise the proper procurement, delivery, storage, and use of these 
goods and materials until the end of the project during its implementation support missions in Djibouti. EDD has a 
computerized stock-level tracking system with entry and exits for each type of material, so the tracking of this 
equipment will be ensured. A positive and negative list of uses will also be added to the Operations Manual.
6.
Relevant legal, fiduciary, and safeguards aspects: Legal covenants and safeguards requirements have broadly been 
complied with1, and there are no deviations from safeguards requirements during implementation thus far. The 
1 Except the Appointment of an independent auditor, whose contract procurement is underway.
The World Bank
Djibouti: Sustainable Electrification Program (P158505)
project is in compliance with social and environmental safeguards (current ISR ratings are Satisfactory). Regarding 
financial management (FM), the first audited financial report of the project is due on June 30, 2019. A slight delay is 
observed in the submission of the first interim financial report (IFR) that was submitted in December 2018. The FM 
rating is Moderately Satisfactory. The Task Team confirms that requirements of OP/BP 10.00 have been met, 
namely: (a) the PDO remains achievable; (b) the performance of the Borrower remains satisfactory; (c) the Bank and 
the Borrower agree on actions that will be undertaken to complete the project on time; and (d) the project is not 
subject to suspension of disbursement.
II. DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED CHANGES
7.
Allow for the financing of goods/materials in EDD’s stock. This would be done through the Bank procurement 
process that is underway. This activity (equipment for maintenance and repairs not exceeding US$2.5 million) would 
be added under Component 1: Extension and Densification of Distribution Systems. It will be part of the large 
equipment contracts of $12 million to be bidded out by the end of May 2019.
8.
Extend the use of retroactive financing for the project until one year before the Financing Agreement signing, which 
would be June 14, 2016.
9.
This extension of “retroactive financing” is to reimburse a small amount (about $86,000) of the retroactive financing 
expenses that the client has done for connecting the first 100 urgent connections under the project. The project 
was approved in June 2017, and in July, there were fires in one area of Djibouti City (not related to the project). But 
these fires resulted in more than 100 families being urgently relocated to the project area (Nassib) where the first 
social houses were ready to be inhabited. Thus, there was an urgent need to connect these houses within a few 
months because of the fires (that were a national level event). Given the urgency, the Bank allowed EDD to use its 
equipment (the total cost was about $376,000 – including $290,000 of equipment purchased after April 1, 2017 that 
was already reimbursed by the IDA credit), since it was in the project area and was urgent. The Bank team did a due 
diligence review of the use of this equipment during the May 2018 mission and documented everything in its May 
mission’s aide-memoire. Some receipts (about $86,0002) that the client has gathered for the reimbursement of this 
equipment go back until 12 months from the Financing Agreement signing, but could not be reimbursed because 
the IDA Credit Agreement allowed reimbursement for expenditures occurred after April 1, 2017.
 
2 = $376,000 - $290,000.
The World Bank
Djibouti: Sustainable Electrification Program (P158505)
 
III. SUMMARY OF CHANGES
Changed
Not Changed
Other Change(s)
✔
  
Implementing Agency
  
✔
DDO Status
  
✔
Project's Development Objectives
  
✔
Results Framework
  
✔
Components and Cost
  
✔
Loan Closing Date(s)
  
✔
Cancellations Proposed
  
✔
Reallocation between Disbursement Categories
  
✔
Disbursements Arrangements
  
✔
Disbursement Estimates
  
✔
Overall Risk Rating
  
✔
Safeguard Policies Triggered
  
✔
EA category
  
✔
Legal Covenants
  
✔
Institutional Arrangements
  
✔
Financial Management
  
✔
Procurement
  
✔
Implementation Schedule
  
✔
Economic and Financial Analysis
  
✔
Technical Analysis
  
✔
Social Analysis
  
✔
Environmental Analysis
  
✔
IV. DETAILED CHANGE(S)
.
