[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 120000 chars → Filtered: 97902 chars (18.4% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
1. 
The Eastern Africa1 region, including Ethiopia and Djibouti, is home to about 384 million people, with the 
majority residing in rural areas and one-third living below the poverty line. Approximately 72 percent of the population 
in the region resides in rural areas,2 and an estimated one-third of the population, about 144 million people, live below 
the international poverty line of US$1.90 a day.3 Wide socioeconomic disparities are seen across countries with gross 
domestic product (GDP) per capita ranging from US$3,206 in Djibouti, US$835 in Ethiopia, to US$1,705 in Kenya,4 and 
Human Development Index (HDI) rankings ranging from 143 (out of 187) for Kenya5 to 171 for Djibouti and 173 for 
Ethiopia. 
2. 
The region has been one of the fastest-growing economic regions in the continent, but growth has faltered in 
recent years, in part due to local imbalances and international shocks. Before 2021, Ethiopia and Djibouti were among 
the fastest growing economies in the world, with GDP growth averaging 10 percent6 and 6 percent, respectively 
(2019/2020). Growth was largely driven by large public sector-led infrastructure investments, which have now faltered 
due to several factors. In Ethiopia, large public investments were funded by inexpensive external credit, which has resulted 
in macroeconomic imbalances and a severe foreign exchange crisis. Because of the COVID-19 pandemic and a dip in global 
trade, which has affected food imports, both countries are now experiencing increased inflation and slowed growth.  
3. 
Half of the countries in the region, specifically in the Horn of Africa (HoA), are afflicted by fragility, conflict, and 
violence (FCV) and related increasing forced displacement in borderland areas creating a risky operating environment. 
Ethiopia is emerging from a large-scale conflict7 that resulted in economic losses amounting to 5.5 percent of GDP, 
pressures on inflation, and mass displacement of people. This has been exacerbated with instability in neighboring South 
Sudan, ongoing armed groups in Somalia (Al Shabab), and an escalating crisis in Sudan,8 which has led to over 100,000 
people fleeing the country and across borders, also entering Ethiopia.9 As a result, Ethiopia currently hosts approximately 
3.5 million internally displaced persons (IDPs).10 Djibouti, which is seen as a transit country to the Middle East, hosts over 
 
1 Eastern Africa represents countries included in both ‘East Africa’ (Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda) and those in the ‘Horn 
of Africa’ (Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, and Uganda). 
2 Population, young, and rural disaggregation estimates are based on 2019 World Bank (WB) staff calculations, WB Indicators. Djibouti is a noticeable 
exception with only 22 percent. 
3 Poverty estimates are based on World Bank staff calculations and the latest available survey data. World Economic Indicators, Horn of Africa Regional 
Economic Memorandum (REM) 2021. 
4 GDP per capita (constant 2015 US dollars) estimates are based on 2020 World Bank staff calculations.  
5 HDI ranking data are based on United Nations Development Programme 2019 estimates (HDI). 
6 Ministry of Finance (MoF), Ministry of Planning and Development, National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) 
7 Simmering tensions between the federal government and the regional government of Tigray (controlled by the Tigray People’s Liberation Front [TPLF] 
culminated in a military confrontation escalating to the outbreak of a violent conflict (2020–2022). In November 2022, a Peace Agreement was signed, 
which has started to pave the way for recovery. 
8 An armed conflict between rival factions of the military government of Sudan began on April 15, 2023, when clashes broke out in cities, with the 
fighting concentrated around the capital city of Khartoum and the Darfur region.  
9 International Organization for Migration Response overview, Sudan Crisis and Neighboring Countries, May 2023.  
10 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Country Operational Update, 2023. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 2  
 
36,000 refugees.11 Protracted periods of civil war, insecurity, and weak political and governance capacity have created a 
risky operating environment in several countries that remain beyond the appetite of most international investors. 
4. 
Ethiopia hosts a significant refugee population, concentrated mainly in borderland areas with low digital 
connectivity. Ethiopia hosted 942,792 refugees and asylum seekers as of August 2023, making it the third largest host 
country in Africa.12  Most refugees live in 24 camps across five regional states (Gambela, Somali, Benishangul Gumuz, Afar, 
and Amhara). The unexpected arrival of 92,000 Somali refugees to the Somali region in February 2023 and 81,000 refugees 
from Sudan, starting in April 2023, have exacerbated socioeconomic challenges (such as access to food, healthcare and 
other related social protection programs) that had already become significant. Most of the refugee population in Ethiopia 
and their host communities are in areas with very low digital connectivity, resulting in low access to digital services (e.g., 
mobile money, access to communication facilities in times of emergency and limitations also in the delivery of 
humanitarian aid) and digital skills which limits employment opportunities, resulting in these groups facing a threat of 
digital exclusion.  
5. 
The region is also highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change and natural disasters, such as earthquakes. 
The region’s topography, high elevation along the rift valley, and long coastline, contribute to high climate variability and 
vulnerability. Rising temperatures and unpredictable rain patterns have resulted in severe flooding, extreme heat and 
persistent drought.13 In Djibouti, climate-induced natural disasters, such as coastal flooding in April 2021, can adversely 
affect physical, including digital, infrastructure,14 elevating the risks of network outages for communities (some 88 percent 
of the population resides by the coast). In Ethiopia, vulnerable communities (refugee camps) in disaster-prone borderland 
areas (climate ‘hotspots’15) do not have access to good connectivity, limiting emergency response communication.  
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
Regional connectivity market: Lack of affordable and accessible broadband connectivity 
6. 
Countries along the coast are set to benefit from increasing access to international connectivity capacity; 
however, deficits in cross-border, in-land fiber networks limit transmission across the region. With proximity to the Red 
Sea, a thoroughfare for major existing and planned international submarine fiber optic cables, countries such as Somalia 
and Djibouti will see connectivity capacity intake more than double.16 Other landlocked countries such as Ethiopia and 
South Sudan rely on their coastal neighbors to access this capacity; however, the absence of diverse cross-border links 
and well-developed fiber optic backbone networks is limiting cost-effective distribution of international traffic and 
creating risks of single points of failure. Accordingly, in 2022, the international internet bandwidth used per inhabitant 
was only 3.7 kilobits per second (kbit/s) in Ethiopia. Although this is much higher in Djibouti, at 1.9 megabits per second 
(Mbit/s), relatively little of this benefits the local population but rather it contributes to international operations. 
 
11 UNHCR update on refugees and asylum seekers in Djibouti as of January 31, 2022. 
12 UNHCR's Ethiopia Update on Total Number of Refugees and Asylum Seekers as of August 31, 2023   
13 In recent times, the HoA has endured three severe droughts (2010–2011, 2016–2017, and 2020–2022) with 19.4 million people being affected by 
food insecurity, malnourishment, and loss of livelihood, and about 30,000 people are annually affected by adverse effects of floods. Source: ReliefWeb. 
14 Specific climate risks to digital and network infrastructure include flooding of buildings that house central network equipment, and silt damage, 
scoured cables and damaged foundations, and cable disruption from uprooted trees that damage fiber optic cables due to high precipitation. 
Meanwhile, high temperatures can cause infrastructure to degrade more quickly.  
15 Regions identified as climate hotspots include, in Ethiopia- Afar, Somali, and Oromia regions which are often hit by severe droughts, and in Djibouti, 
coastal cities such as Djibouti city face high risk of flooding, climate risk country profile, World Bank  
16 Eleven submarine cables currently land in the HoA region (in Djibouti and Somalia). By 2024, four more systems are expected to land in the HoA 
region—2Africa, Africa-1, and India-Europe Express (IEX) and Raman—which will provide the African market access to well over 500 terabytes per 
second of potential additional capacity, as per World Bank and Telecommunications Management Group (TMG). 2022. HoA Missing Links Study. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 3  
 
Optimizing the regional network is highly dependent on the readiness of onward connectivity on both sides of the border, 
underpinned by political will to instate cross-border fiber sharing agreements.  
7. 
Fragility and conflict dynamics have damaged key ICT infrastructure and resulted in mass displacement limiting 
incentives for market investments in connectivity. Local conflict, notably in the Tigray, Amhara and Afar region of Ethiopia 
(2020–2022), has resulted in severe damages to infrastructures: 34 percent of all cell sites (3,473 cell towers), ICT 
equipment such as Local Area Network (LAN) cables in over 4,000 schools, and up to 2,500 kilometers (km) of fiber optic 
cable were burned, damaged, or destroyed. The total cost of full replacement of ICT infrastructure is estimated to be 
approximately US$618 million.17 The local conflict in Ethiopia, coupled with regional political instability (notably in Sudan 
and Somalia) have resulted in mass displacement of people, particularly in rural, borderland areas. Refugees in the border 
regions of Somali and Gambela alone amount to over 680,000, not including the recent inflow of refugees from Somalia 
and Sudan. Insecurity and low disposable incomes have kept these areas off the digital grid with limited incentives for 
investment. The current levels of infrastructure investment, in middle- and last-mile networks, shows evidence of market 
failure and are unlikely to meet the growing demands in the absence of de-risking investments through the provision of 
subsidized capital. Investments in digital connectivity and skills can unlock critical needs for self-reliance of these 
borderland and conflict-affected communities, as well as their access to services and human capital. 
8. 
The HOA region is home to state-owned enterprises (SOEs), which have historically limited opportunities for 
private sector investments and failed to bring competitive price offerings to consumers. The region includes two 
countries where SOEs have retained significant market power (Ethio Telecom18) or a virtual monopoly (Djibouti Telecom19) 
and which own, operate, and manage most of the existing telecom infrastructure in each country. Although both Ethiopia 
and Djibouti have only recently established their industry regulators for the ICT sector, in 201920 and 202121 respectively, 
early steps of reform are beginning to be seen. For instance, in September 2019, Ethiopia passed a historic new law 
liberalizing its telecom market, and in July 2021 Djibouti made the decision to open Djibouti Telecom’s capital. While these 
steps mark a significant departure, they have lacked sufficient pace and momentum, and critical reforms, such as cost-
oriented interconnection and infrastructure sharing, or open access, still lie ahead. As a result, the market continues to 
show evidence of limited competition largely on retail prices for broadband. The price of 2 GB of data is approximately 
6.2 and 3.4 percent of gross national income (GNI) per capita per month in Djibouti and Ethiopia, respectively, above the 
Alliance for Affordable Internet target of 2 percent,22 and above that of regional and continental peers.  
9. 
There are also widespread disparities in the telecom regulatory and market landscape with potential for greater 
harmonization. The region is home to countries with varying levels of connectivity infrastructure, which explains current 
price, performance, and broadband penetration differentials—with the latter ranging from 5 percent in South Sudan, 22 
percent in Ethiopia, 37 percent in Djibouti to 48 percent in Kenya.23 While Ethiopia and Djibouti face issues of nascent 
regulatory regimes and unaffordability of data, neighboring Somalia offers some of the lowest prices for broadband on 
the continent and Kenya benefits from an advanced modern regulatory authority, in operation since the 1990s. Given 
 
17 Adapted from Federal Government of Ethiopia (FGE) and World Bank. Forthcoming. Ethiopia Conflict Impact Assessment and Rehabilitation Project: 
Volume A - Damage and Needs Assessment. Actual costs may be lower if equipment can be repaired rather than fully replaced. 
18 A full-service telecom player, Safaricom Ethiopia that was licensed in June 2021 and started offering services in October 2022, has taken a considerable 
share of the data market, but has struggled to compete in the retail voice market as Ethio Telecom’s retail prices are currently below the wholesale rate 
for interconnection. 
19 A wholesale fiber operator, AfriFiber, has been licensed but is yet to launch commercial operations. There is no competition in the retail market or in 
mobile communications. 
20 The ICT sector regulator in Ethiopia, Ethiopian Communications Authority, was created in 2019. 
21 The Multisector Regulatory Authority of Djibouti (ARMD) was created in 2021 covering both ICT and energy, but it is not yet fully operational as of 
July 2023. 
22 https://a4ai.org/affordable-internet-is-1-for-2/.  
23 Penetration rates are defined here as unique, active broadband subscriptions (mobile + fixed) per 100 inhabitants. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 4  
 
these contrasts and capacity gaps, there is a need to both strengthen and harmonize the existing policy and regulatory 
environment conducive to wider connectivity infrastructure investment and a more integrated connectivity market. At a 
wholesale level, this would, for example, imply a need for interoperability nationally and between backbone networks 
across adjacent countries, whereas at a retail level this could mean developing regional guidelines or standards on licenses, 
infrastructure sharing, or other policies; or expanding regional telecom initiatives aimed at progressively eliminating 
roaming charges such as the One Network Area (ONA) of the East African Community (EAC).24 
10. 
Gender inequality in the use of digital technology and digital skills remains prominent. A stark gender gap is 
recorded in literacy, due to lower school enrollment and completion rates. This is expected to have an adverse impact on 
digital skills,25 access to digitally enabled services, and jobs. Based on available data, access to and use of information and 
communication technology (ICT) for women is limited, for instance, in Ethiopia, female-to-male internet and mobile use 
is estimated to be 0.7 and 0.6 respectively, while for Djibouti this is 0.8 and 0.9.26 A paucity of sectoral gender-
disaggregated data makes formulating effective and targeted responses in these countries challenging.  
11. 
Data traffic is increasing, but this is often routed through distant international locations, resulting in higher 
costs of data for consumers and lower quality of service. The limited presence of local data exchanges and data centers 
is resulting in most of the domestic and regional data traffic being routed through international networks (via Europe, 
Middle East, and India), thus increasing the latency for data transmission and reducing the quality of service, and incurring 
additional costs, which are passed on to the end consumers. While Djibouti has established a Tier 3 carrier neutral data 
center, which also hosts the Djibouti internet exchange (DjIX),27 neither country has yet attracted as many of the data 
content distribution networks (CDNs), data caches, and cloud providers, as other emerging internet hubs (Kenya and South 
Africa) have, due to limitations on private sector ownership and absence of a Data Protection Act.28 As internet traffic 
steadily increases, a key consideration for improving affordable and quality connectivity in the HoA region will be to reduce 
the distance between end users and data content through expanding national or regional exchanges and data centers. 
Cross-border data exchanges will also require common principles in the treatment of cross-border data (for example, 
facilitating signature of Convention 108+29 and implementation of data protection standards, such as ISO30 27007), to 
promote exchange of data across the region. 
Regional data market: Absence of effective and secure data exchange 
12. 
Expanding data transmission, storage can create new risks to data privacy, and countries are only beginning to 
establish the guardrails of requisite institutional governance, and regulatory norms. For instance, Ethiopia has yet to 
pass a Data Protection Act and related governance frameworks, though the Council of Ministers approved a draft in 
October 2023. Djibouti has recently developed a draft Digital Code31 mandating the creation of a Commission for Data 
Protection, though this is pending operationalization. Implementation of a trusted data ecosystem also requires 
 
24 In 2014, the EAC made a joint commitment toward the One Network Area, which initially eliminated voice roaming charges in Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda, 
and South Sudan and in 2015 expanded its efforts to encompass Short Message Service (SMS), data, and mobile money transactions. 
25 Digital skills is defined as a combination of the basic knowledge required to access digital technology (such as operate ICT devices, tools), as well 
specialized learnings on topics within the ICT sector such as coding, web design, cybersecurity and data protection, among others.  
26 https://www.digitalgendergaps.org/. 
27 DjIX has 16 members, operators and CDN (Cloudflare) which exchanges about 5–6 Gigabits per second (Gbit/s) traffic daily.  
28 World Bank and TMG. 2022. HoA Missing Links Study. 
29 This refers to a Council of Europe Treaty (Convention for the Protection of Individuals with Regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data) that 
protects the right to privacy of individuals, taking into account the increasing flow across borders and frontiers of personal data undergoing automatic 
processing. The Convention was signed in 1981 and modernized in 2018. 
30 International Organization for Standardization. 
31 Digital Code and Law 164 of July 27, 2022 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 5  
 
developing adequate capacity in Government for cybersecurity. While some countries rank above the global average in 
terms of cybersecurity preparedness, most countries in the region fall significantly below.32 Reportedly, in 2018, the cost 
of cybercrime was estimated to be US$277 million in Ethiopia,33 while Kenya lost US$295 million,34 equivalent to 
0.4 percent of its GDP, to malicious cyber activities. Key obstacles in the region are the lack of cooperation mechanisms 
and the insufficient cybersecurity workforce, which undermine the development of adequate cybersecurity maturity.  
Regional online market: Limited cross-border digital trade and e-services enablers such as digital skills 
13. 
The region is looking to accelerate trade facilitation, and regional economic communities (RECs) are stepping 
up their role as facilitators to advance the integration of digital markets. Countries in the region stand to gain from 
economies of scale, network effects, and spillovers, to boost growth and job creation.35 On this basis, the African Union 
(AU) and RECs such as the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), to which both Ethiopia and Djibouti serve 
as member states, have taken steps to support the incremental integration of regional markets. The most comprehensive 
of these efforts is the signing of the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) in 201836 by 54 African countries, which 
envisages, among other things, the adoption of continent-wide rules on e-commerce with wide-ranging expected welfare 
gains.37 While Djibouti and Ethiopia have both ratified the agreement, other countries, such as South Sudan, are yet to do 
so. Even with ratification, support will be required at the national level to implement the e-commerce protocols. This 
support could also be expanded to aid countries such as Ethiopia, which is yet to accede to global trade agreements under 
the World Trade Organization (WTO) due to, primarily, limited liberalization of the telecom sector.38  
14. 
Relatively few higher education institutions (HEIs), are equipped with adequate connectivity or have the 
capabilities to produce the requisite digital skills base. Several countries in the region have gained from establishing 
National Research and Education Networks (NRENs) (for instance, Ethiopian Research and Education Network [EthERNet], 
Somalia Research and Education Network [SomaliREN] and the Kenya Education Network Trust [KENET]39) that have been 
successful in expanding access to high-speed broadband connectivity to HEIs, although additional support is needed to 
reach universal coverage. On the other hand, Djibouti and South Sudan are yet to set-up NRENs. In addition to connectivity, 
digital skills are required to access digital tools. Presently, both the availability and quality of digital skills training in the 
region is limited, and universities across the region are ill-equipped with the requisite infrastructure, curricula, and trainers 
to deliver effective training and leverage online platforms to enhance training delivery. Further, skilled talent in newer 
specialized areas of cybersecurity and data management are increasingly needed in countries such as Djibouti,40 but 
existing digital skills programs are yet to cater to this demand. 
 
 
 
32 Djibouti and Ethiopia ranked 42 and 21 out of 43 countries in Africa (179 and 115 out of 182 countries, globally), with a score of 1.7 and 27.7 out of 
100, respectively. ITU. 2021. Global Cybersecurity Index 2020. 
33 Cybercrime and Cryptocurrency: An Analysis of Cybercrime and Cryptocurrency Use in Ethiopia. https://www.unodc.org/documents/data-and-
analysis/Studies/TOC_cybercrime_and_cryptocurrency_ethiopia.pdf. 
34 Kenya Cybersecurity Report, Serianu 2018. 
35 World Bank. 2018. Single Digital Market for East Africa, estimated that further digital market integration within the EAC has the potential to boost 
the region’s GDP by up to US$2.6 billion and create up to 4.5 million new jobs.  
36 As of March 2023, 46 of the 54 signatories have deposited their instruments of AfCFTA ratification.  
37 UNECA (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa). 2020. Creating a Unified Regional Market: Towards the Implementation of the African 
Continental Free Trade Area in East Africa.  
38 Ethiopia has held observer status in the WTO since 1997. The country formally applied for accession in 2003, this is yet to materialize, in part due to 
the country lacking readiness to meet commitments of liberalizing the telecom, banking sectors.  
39 In Eastern Africa, six countries—Kenya, Burundi, Ethiopia, Uganda, Rwanda, and Tanzania—have existing NRENs. These are a part of the regional 
alliance of NRENs known as UbuntuNet-East, which has helped reduce the costs of connectivity to the higher education sector through regional 
cooperation. World Bank. 2016. The Role and Status of NRENs in Africa. 
40 World Bank. Forthcoming. Digital Economy for Africa Diagnostic Assessment for Djibouti.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 6  
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
15. 
The project is integral to the wider HoA Initiative and supports the AU’s ‘Agenda 2063’. The project is aligned 
with the regional HoA Initiative, contributing to Pillar 1 (Improving Regional Infrastructure Connectivity), through financing 
cross-border regional infrastructure, and will also contribute to Pillar 2 (Economic and Trade Integration) by financing 
regional dataflows and exchanges, aligned with the HoA Trade Facilitation Roadmap41. The project will support Agenda 
2063, which prioritizes the development of digital infrastructure and complements the AU’s Digital Transformation 
Strategy for Africa 2020–2030.42 The operationalization of that strategy is supported by the World Bank Group’s Digital 
Economy for Africa (DE4A) initiative. It will also contribute toward the World Bank Group’s IDA-20 digital commitments 
(as elaborated in Annex 4). 
16. 
At the country level, the project will support the implementation of the World Bank Group Country Partnership 
Frameworks (CPFs) and complement the ongoing national digital operations. The Djibouti CPF (FY22–26, 147787-
DJ)43notes that the telecom sector remains uncompetitive and would benefit from entry of the private sector to boost 
innovation and efficiency. The Ethiopia CPF (FY18–22, extended to FY23, 119576-ET)44, recognizes the ICT sector as a key 
factor in advancing productivity and structural transformation. The project’s support on infrastructure deployment 
through competitive tendering and regulatory reform toward opening the market supports the CPF. The project will also 
complement existing IDA lending programs: Digital Djibouti (P174461), and Digital Ethiopia (P171034). 
17. 
The project also supports the World Bank Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV) (2020–2025) and 
related Government policies, including on refugee protection. The FCV strategy recognizes the role of digital 
transformation in a holistic approach to promoting peace and reducing economic exclusion. Ethiopia is classified as fragile 
and conflict-afflicted situations (FCS), where the project will provide financial assistance targeting rural, remote, and post 
conflict regions and those affected by displacement with the aim of inclusive transformation. The project is also aligned 
with the regional integration strategy.45 The Government of Ethiopia has affirmed its commitment to supporting refugee 
inclusion through its 2019 Refugee Proclamation, Out of Camp Policy, and April 2023 Strategy Note provided to the World 
Bank. The UNHCR refugee protection assessment update (dated February 2023), confirms that the protection framework 
for refugees continues to be adequate in Ethiopia till date. The Government of Ethiopia continues to implement its 
commitments made at the 2019 Global Refugee Forum, including supporting institutional mechanisms such as the 
dedicated agency-Refugee and Returnee Service (RRS), enacting revisions in the National Refugee Law (2019) to provide 
refugees with the right to work and live outside of camps, thereby upholding the country’s commitment towards an open-
door asylum policy.  
18. 
The project will follow the World Bank’s Private Capital Mobilization (PCM) approach. The project will 
strategically leverage public funds directly to mobilize private sector investment in the backbone, and access network 
expansion, in support of PCM, through competitive tendering processes. The project will also address key bottlenecks to 
commercial investments, through development of enabling legal and regulatory frameworks, and demand stimulus that 
 
41 Horn of Africa Initiative. 2022. Regional Trade Facilitation Roadmap, 2022-25. https://www.hoainitiative.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/HoAI-
Trade-Facilitation-Roadmap-English.pdf  
42 The AU’s Digital Transformation Strategy sets out a bold digital vision for Africa, including ensuring that every individual, business, and government 
is digitally enabled by 2030, to encourage the region’s full participation in the global digital economy. See 
https://au.int/en/documents/20200518/digital-transformation-strategy-africa-2020-2030. 
43 WBG. 2021. Djibouti - Country Partnership Framework for the Period FY22-FY26 (English). Report No. 147787-DJ. 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/419571633105207198/Djibouti-Country-Partnership-Framework-for-the-Period-FY22-FY26.  
44 WBG. 2017. Ethiopia - Country partnership framework for the period FY18 - FY22. Report No. 119576-ET. 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/202771504883944180/Ethiopia-Country-partnership-framework-for-the-period-FY18-FY22.  
45 Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy - Update for the Period FY21–FY23 (Report No. 154458). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 7  
 
helps create markets in last-mile access networks in rural and borderland areas, addressing identified market failures (see 
Section II.E).  
19. 
The project directly supports World Bank’s Global Challenge Programs (GCPs), and it is aligned with the World 
Bank’s Green, Resilient, and Inclusive Development (GRID) agenda,46 and IDA-20 Technology Policy Commitments. The 
SOP and the Project will help the participating countries build digital foundations that accelerate digitization at scale in 
the sub-region in line with the GCPs’ “Accelerating Digitization” agenda. It will contribute notably to GRID’s Pillar 4 
(Strengthening policies, institutions and investments for rebuilding better) through investments in resilient infrastructure 
(Component 1) and digital solutions for government (Component 2) that can allow for continuity of operations in times of 
crisis. It will help to fulfill five of the six IDA-20 cross-cutting technology policy commitments (see Annex 4).  
20. 
The project will support the countries in achieving their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) and 
contribute to efforts of climate change mitigation and adaptation. In their latest NDC submitted to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, Ethiopia47 and Djibouti48 commit to reduce their greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions by 69 percent and 40 percent, respectively, by 2030, with 80 percent (Ethiopia) and 70 percent (Djibouti) of this 
commitment conditioned on the support of the international community.49 In both Ethiopia and Djibouti, one of the key 
mitigation actions identified in the National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) is prioritizing renewable energy solutions, which the 
project will contribute toward, for instance by replacing diesel generator cellular base stations with solar powered ones 
and replacing copper cables with fiber in post-conflict areas.50 On adaptation, NDCs outline the need for building resilience 
in the infrastructure and rural, vulnerable communities to climate disasters. Here the project will help support (a) targeted 
coverage of climate hot-spots (flood-prone areas in Ethiopia and coastal areas in Djibouti) and populations; and 
(b) emergency communication response facilities for climate related emergencies in vulnerable remote areas (rural, 
remote borderland areas with refugee host communities in Ethiopia). For Djibouti, a key priority is developing a ‘National 
Strategy for a Green Economy’ and for Ethiopia preparing a NAP implementation roadmap for the ICT sector,51 for which 
the project will provide technical assistance (TA) towards developing.  
D. Rationale for SOPII 
21. 
The project is the second in a Series of Project (SOP) approach to be implemented over time with the objective 
of advancing regional digital market integration. Activities of the SOP have been designed to support creating an 
integrated regional digital network and market by focusing on select countries and participating RECs, based on availability 
of IDA funds, meeting eligibility criteria and countries’ readiness and commitment52 to the broader SOP objective. SOP-I 
(EARDIP, P176181) provides financing for countries with the lowest levels of digital development (Somalia and South 
 
46 https://thedocs.worldbank.org/en/doc/9385bfef1c330ed6ed972dd9e70d0fb7-0200022021/original/DC2021-0004-Green-Resilient-final.pdf 
47 July 2021. 
48 November 2016. 
49 Source: Ethiopia NDC July 2021 Submission, Djibouti first NDC submission, 2016, https://unfccc.int/NDCREG. 
50 Research has shown that coaxial cables consume more energy than fiber optic cables; copper networks consume about 3.5 W at full 100 m reach 
capability while fiber networks may use less than 1 W to transmit the 10 GbE signal over 300 m. See How Fiber Can Help Make the Network Greener. 
Fiber is also 70–80 percent more reliable than copper, which results in approximately 60 percent fewer maintenance callouts and other operational 
savings between 40 percent and 60 percent; see Godlovitch, Ilsa, Peter Kroon, Sonia Strube Martins, and Fabian Eltges. 2019. “Copper Switch-off, A 
European Benchmark.” FTTH Council Europe Conference, Amsterdam, page 8. 
51 NAP implementation roadmaps exist for the agriculture, forestry, health, transport, energy, industry, and waste sectors, defining priorities for 2025–
20230.  
52 Readiness, or commitment, is based on (a) agreement and commitment to key policies or features of the regional program, (b) a strategic national 
plan to implement relevant actions under the regional program, (c) adequate implementation capacity and leadership in the country for moving forward 
the specific measures/actions relevant to the program, (d) willingness to share information with other participants in the program, and (e) satisfactory 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements that will aid in providing feedback on program performance as well as other relevant factors such as 
national IDA availability and the feasibility of World Bank support in the country. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 8  
 
Sudan) and grants to two RECs (EAC and IGAD), primarily toward establishing connectivity infrastructure and harmonizing 
ICT regulations across the region. These up-front investments will benefit SOP-II, which will be implemented in parallel. 
Common activities being carried out across the SOP will benefit from knowledge sharing. SOP-II will focus on expanding 
the program to Djibouti and Ethiopia (Table 1). 
Table 1.  SOP Overview, SOP-I, SOP-II 
 
SOP-I 
SOP-II 
Program Objective 
To advance digital market integration in the Eastern Africa region by increasing affordable access to 
regional broadband connectivity and strengthening the enabling environment for cross-border digital 
services. 
Recipients 
Somalia, South Sudan, EAC, and IGAD 
Ethiopia and Djibouti 
IDA Financing 
US$172 million 
US$130 million 
Duration 
2023–2028 
2024–2029 
22. 
The SOP will complement other ongoing and pipeline regional operations in the HoA. The project builds on and 
complements ongoing support under Ethiopia Digital Foundations Project (P171034) and Djibouti Digital Foundations 
Project (P174461). For instance, support for creating a more competitive telecom market is being provided in Ethiopia 
through supporting the partial privatization of Ethio Telecom, and in both countries creating a strong telecom regulator 
and issuing additional licenses. The project will leverage the results from the ongoing operations, and further support in 
developing the market. The Kenya Digital Economy Acceleration Project (KDEAP; P170941) is providing US$70 million in 
additional regional funds for supporting Kenya’s participation in these activities, for instance, building the cross-border 
fiber link between South Sudan and Kenya on the Kenya side—a key complement to EARDIP support. Investments in 
improving cross-border infrastructure will also assist with other HoA initiatives, particularly those that are infrastructure 
based. Wherever possible, digital infrastructure investments will be coordinated with other infrastructure investments in 
the HoA region. At the continental level, this SOP, including the Project, complement a similar series of projects in West 
and Central Africa planned to be supported by the World Bank, including the forthcoming West Africa Regional Digital 
Integration Program (WARDIP)

A. Project Development Objective 
PDO Statement 
23. 
The Series of Projects (SOP) development objective is to promote the expansion of an integrated digital market 
across Eastern Africa by increasing cross-border broadband connectivity, data flows and digital trade in the region. 
The development objective of SOP-II is to advance digital market integration in the Eastern Africa region by increasing 
affordable access to regional broadband connectivity, strengthening the enabling environment and policy convergence for 
cross-border digital trade and data flows, and developing digital skills. 53  
PDO Level Indicators 
24. 
The achievement of the PDO will be measured by the following results indicators: 
(a) 
Increasing affordable access to regional broadband connectivity 
 
53 For reference, the SOP-I PDO is to advance digital market integration in the Eastern Africa region by increasing affordable access to regional 
broadband connectivity and strengthening the enabling environment for cross-border digital services. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 9  
 
• 
People provided with enhanced access to broadband internet, of which females, in Djibouti and Ethiopia, 
and of which refugees, host community members, in Ethiopia (number) 
• 
Mobile broadband price (monthly, 2 GB) as a percentage of gross national income per capita, in Djibouti 
and Ethiopia (percentage) 
(b) 
Strengthening the enabling environment for cross-border digital trade and data flows  
• Volume of international data traffic54 (used international internet bandwidth per inhabitant), in Djibouti 
and Ethiopia (in kbit/s) 
(c) 
Developing digital skills 
• 
Beneficiaries with new or improved income opportunities because of digital skills training under the 
project, of which, females, in Djibouti and Ethiopia and of which refugees and host community, in Ethiopia 
(number). 
B. Project Components 
25. 
As with SOP-I, the SOP-II Project is designed around three integrated and mutually reinforcing components, 
which reflect the distinct but interconnected layers of an integrated regional digital market. The allocation of funds for 
SOP-I and SOP-II, including the WHR allocation, is indicated in table 2. 
Component 1: Connectivity Market Development and Integration (US$132 million, including US$102 million IDA equivalent; 
and US$30 million in UCF) 
26. 
This component will help develop the regional broadband connectivity market through financing bridging 
existing network coverage and access gaps, supporting rehabilitation of damaged infrastructure, and strengthening the 
enabling regulatory environment. Support provided will address strategic network coverage and access gaps, particularly 
in vulnerable areas such as borderland and post conflict-affected regions and enhance network redundancy through 
financing cable route diversity allowing the region to meet increasing demand for internet bandwidth. Cross-border, 
national backbone and backhaul, and access network infrastructure will be partially financed where there is a market 
failure, through de-risking efforts, via reverse auctions and demand aggregation, with targets for PCM. The project will 
also explore additional incentives to attract the private sector, such as leveraging potential downstream support from IFC 
or the IDA Private Sector Window for financing and MIGA for guarantees—if deemed feasible during project 
implementation. Upstream support for an enabling regulatory environment for competitive broadband market 
development through licensing arrangements will also be provided, including embedding standards for climate change 
resilience, and encouraging a gender lens in ICT policies.  
Subcomponent 1.1: Cross-border and national backbone network connectivity (US$41.8 million, including US$26.8 million 
IDA equivalent; and US$15 million in UCF) 
27. 
This subcomponent will support the deployment of key additional cross-border and backbone fiber links to 
improve the resilience, coverage, and integration of regional connectivity networks. Financing support will be provided 
to build strategic links or segments of links that are not commercially viable, through a range of modalities to encourage 
private sector investment such as reverse auctions, pre-purchase of internet capacity and others to be detailed in a 
 
54 Ideally, at a later date, once IXPs are well established, it will be possible to disaggregate traffic by route, to gain a better understanding of the impact 
on bilateral data flows and trade. IECD and Packetclearinghouse.net are working on this in countries with well=established IXPs. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 10  
 
Commercial Transaction Manual (CTM).55 Operators will be expected to own, co-finance, design, build, and operate the 
network infrastructure. Infrastructure deployment will be based on key principles56 of flexibility, technology neutrality, 
providing services on an open access basis while offering reasonable wholesale rates to support affordable service 
expansion to be detailed in the CTM. Project financing will cover the following: 
Table 2. Project Costs and Financing Sources for the SOP, with phase I and phase II (US$, million equivalent) 
 
Phase-I 
Phase-II 
SOP 
Total 
Component 
RECs (EAC, 
IGAD) 
South Sudan 
Somalia 
UCF 
Total 
Djibouti 
Ethiopia (of 
which WHR) 
UCF 
Total 
 
Component 1. Connectivity Market 
Development and Integration 
5.6 
48.0 
50.0 
30.0 
133.6 
17.5 
84.5 
30.0 
132.0 
265.6 
1.1. Cross-border and national 
backbone network connectivity  
0.0 
36.2 
30.6 
30.0 
96.8 
8.8  
18.0 
15.0 
41.8 
138.6 
1.2. Last mile connectivity, including in 
borderland areas  
0.0 
9.0 
15.4 
0.0 
24.4 
7.7  
62.0 
(26.0) 
15.0 
84.7 
109.1 
1.3. Enabling legal, regulatory, and 
institutional ICT environment 
5.6 
2.7 
4.0 
0.0 
12.3 
1.0 
4.5 
0.0 
5.5 
17.8 
Component 2. Data Market 
Development and Integration  
8.3 
4.0 
6.8 
0.0 
19.1 
1.0 
6.7 
0.0 
7.7 
26.8 
2.1. Cybersecurity frameworks, 
infrastructure, and capacity  
4.5 
1.7 
2.2 
0.0 
8.4 
0.8  
6.0  
0.0 
6.8 
15.2 
2.2. Data exchange, governance, and 
protection  
3.8 
2.2 
4.6 
0.0 
10.6 
0.2  
0.7 
0.0 
0.9 
11.5 
Component 3. Online Market 
Development and Integration  
6.9 
6.3 
7.0 
0.0 
20.2 
0.5 
13.3 
0.0 
13.8 
34.0 
3.1. Digital enablers for cross-border 
trade and service delivery  
6.9 
0.9 
1.7 
0.0 
9.5 
0.0  
1.3 
0.0 
1.3 
10.8 
3.2. Research and education networks 
and training for digital skills  
0.0 
5.4 
5.2 
0.0 
10.6 
0.5  
12.0 
(3.0) 
0.0 
12.5 
23.1 
Component 4. Project Management 
and Implementation Support  
4.2 
8.7 
16.2 
0.0 
29.1 
1.0 
5.5 
(1.0) 
0.0 
6.5 
35.6 
Component 5: Contingent Emergency 
Response  
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0  
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
TOTAL 
25.0 
67.0 
80.0 
30.0 
202.0 
20.0 
110.0 
(30.0) 
30.0 
160.0 
362.0 
Note: UCF refers to Unguaranteed Commercial Financing. Financing for RECs and countries in SOP-I and SOP II includes both national 
and regional IDA allocations. It is expected to be disbursed mainly in the last two years of project implementation. Table 3, IDA 
financing, provides financing split by IDA window (National PBA, Regional and WHR). 
 
55 The CTM will be developed through in-depth industry consultations to identify sustainable commercial models for each of the priority routes and will 
include (a) guidelines for developing the deployment options including public-private partnerships or other models with the operators (particularly for 
ensuring optimization of the recipient resources in those partnerships), (b) obligations of the operators in return for contributions from the recipient, 
(c) principles to follow to ensure open and non-discriminatory access to infrastructure built through the project, (d) principles that ensure reasonable 
prices for the end user, (e) the necessary amendments to the regulatory environment, and (f) the template form of the agreement.   
56 Key principles on infrastructure deployment could include competitive tender processes, non-exclusivity or open access, maximizing private sector 
participation, and provision of dark fiber to HEIs and government institutions, among others. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 11  
 
(a) 
Up-front Technical assistance (TA) to prepare the CTM, including preparing related bidding documents and 
support for launching and administering the commercial transactions (These activities will target both Ethiopia and 
Djibouti). 
(b) 
TA for feasibility studies, including surveys and detailed network design including targeting climate hot-spots,57 
including drafting technical specifications for prioritized routes, identifying sites to be connected along the priority 
routes,58 leveraging parallel deployment of linear infrastructure (for example, roads, electricity distribution networks, and 
so on) wherever possible (Ethiopia and Djibouti). 
(c) 
Financing of new construction, repair, and upgrade of cross-border terrestrial links and national backbone 
network infrastructure by following international best-practice guidelines on climate resilience and embedding climate 
adaptation measures (figure 1). This will be subject to a disbursement condition by the adoption of a CTM.   
• 
Ethiopia: Up to 1,500km of fiber,59 covering: 
o Cross-border links between Ethiopia and (i) Djibouti - between Halli and Balho (74 km); (ii) bordering Eritrea - 
between Adwa-Mitsiwa-Asmara (275 km) and Halli to Assab (207 km); and (iii) Somalia - between Imi to Dolo (300 
km) and Gode to Beledweyne (210 km). 
o Upgrade, repair, and parallel deployment along the borders with Djibouti, Kenya, Somalia, and South Sudan. 
• 
Djibouti. Up to 300 km of fiber for the cross-border link with Northeast frontier of Ethiopia between Balho and 
Djibouti city’s existing link, approximately 250 km, and upgrade of connections toward Galilé in the South and Galafi 
on the West. 
Figure 1. Priority Fiber Optic Missing Links for Ethiopia and Djibouti 
 
Source: Adapted from World Bank and TMG. 202260. 
 
57 Survey work will take account of climate-related risks, such as flash floods, coastal flooding etc. 
58 A series of prefeasibility studies (including an HoA Missing Links Study) and diagnostic assessments (Digital Economy for Africa [DE4A] Djibouti) have 
been conducted to identify network gaps. The TA envisioned will build on the findings of these earlier assessments. 
59 For both countries, selection of routes is informed by the feasibility study carried out during project preparation (World Bank and TMG, 2022) as well 
as stakeholder consultations. 
60 World Bank and Telecom Management Group. 2022. Missing Links in the Horn of Africa. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 12  
 
Subcomponent 1.2: Last mile connectivity, including in borderland areas (US$84.7 million, including US$69.7 million IDA 
equivalent and US$15 million in UCF) 
28. 
This subcomponent will connect rural, borderland areas and support rehabilitation of conflict-damaged 
infrastructure, where the commercial incentives are insufficient to propel infrastructure investment. By providing 
catalytic funding to stimulate demand by key user groups (including in refugee camps and surrounding host communities, 
conflict-affected areas in Ethiopia, in HEIs, schools and hospitals, and locations in rural and borderland areas), as well as 
towards post-conflict re-construction, this subcomponent will address existing market failures. The financed infrastructure 
will adopt a range of technologies and be low-carbon and climate-resilient (Annex 3), and it will be deployed using a range 
of modalities, including multi-round reverse auctions and bulk pre-purchase of internet capacity,61 and/or licensing 
arrangements that aim to maximize private sector financing. The regions targeted represent the highest refugee-hosting 
regions in Ethiopia (Gambela and Somali) comprising over 50 percent of Ethiopia's total refugee population (Annex 5) and 
those directly impacted by the conflict in Northern Ethiopia (Tigray, Afar) and by drought (Somali) where customized digital 
solutions will be provided to aid in transforming the way humanitarian aid is delivered, as well as expand digital access 
among vulnerable groups. Project financing will cover the following:  
(a) 
Financing rehabilitation and augmentation of digital infrastructure in the conflict-affected area, notably in Tigray, 
Afar, and Amhara, but also in Benishangul Gumuz and Oromia; including rehabilitating cell towers, fiber optic links, 
transmission networks, emergency communication facilities (including access to extreme weather alerts), and digital 
connectivity, as well as infrastructure in universities, and related ICT devices (These activities will target Ethiopia).  
(b) 
Financing for fiber backhaul and last-mile cellular networks in borderland areas, including covering refugee camps, 
and their host communities, targeting also climate hot-spots:62 
• 
Ethiopia. Establishing/upgrading digital infrastructure including but not limited to, mobile broadband, emergency 
response facilities (such as satellite terminals), low-cost online access points, e-Government equipment, ICT devices and 
other needs based on customized digital solutions particularly for host communities and refugees in refugee-hosting 
woredas in Somali region (8 camps) bordering Somalia, Gambela (14 camps) bordering South Sudan, and Afar region (3 
camps) bordering Eritrea and Djibouti. The project will also potentially target camps in the Tigray region63 and areas with 
new refugee settlements or camps. Prepurchase of internet capacity will be used to support internet use in refugee camps 
and host communities, under a “government as anchor tenant” approach to encourage private sector investment.  
• 
Djibouti. (i) Deploying 12 fiber extensions to fourth generation mobile technology (4G) cell towers, broadband IP 
microwave hops, and core network upgrade; and (ii) building new fiber segments up to 120 km in Dikhil, Tadjourah, and 
covering sites in Obock.  
Subcomponent 1.3. Enabling legal, regulatory, and institutional ICT environment (US$5.5 million IDA equivalent) 
29. 
This subcomponent will provide upstream enabling policy and regulatory support, as well as capacity building 
to the newly established telecom sector regulatory authorities. Complementing ongoing support being provided by 
 
61 Prepurchase of internet bandwidth from operators, under indefeasible right -of-use contracts, bundled with maintenance costs, spanning 5–15 years, 
will serve as an investment guarantee needed to incentivize private sector capital expenses investment in the rollout of last-mile access networks that 
connect targeted locations. It will also benefit the wider consumer base in the vicinity of connected locations, with the Governments of Ethiopia and 
Djibouti serving as the anchor tenants required for enhanced service provision. 
62 Increased coverage from cellular services will increase the number of people able to receive extreme weather alerts, for instance, as part of climate 
change adaptation. 
63 The situation of refugees in the Tigray region has not been assessed yet. Due to the conflict in Northern Ethiopia, refugees formerly in Tigray were 
relocated by RRS to camps in other regions like Amhara. The RRS is presently preparing to re-engage in the Tigray region and the EARDIP SOP-II will 
extend to refugee-hosting woredas in Tigray as the situation permits. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 13  
 
national digital projects, further support will be extended to national line ministries to develop ICT sector guidelines, 
including a gender and climate lens. Support will be provided for activities to build capacity at the newly established 
telecom sector regulatory authorities in Ethiopia and Djibouti to ensure effective implementation and supervision of ICT 
investments, including universal service objectives, and also allow them to partake in regional initiatives with the RECs. 
Project financing will cover the following: 
(a) 
TA to design effective ICT and broadband frameworks, including policies and plans (sector plans and master plans) 
at national and regional levels that integrate inclusion, with gender equality and accessibility for people with 
disabilities, complementing support provided under national programs (These activities will target both Djibouti, 
Ethiopia). 
(b) 
TA for the development of regional guidelines and national protocols for the greening of digital infrastructure, 
including the reduction of GHG emissions and adaptation to potential climate impacts, for instance through the 
exploitation of renewable energy and through the development of e-Waste management plans and guidelines on 
integrating climate resilience for connectivity and data infrastructure (Djibouti, Ethiopia). 
(c) 
TA, capacity building, and systems64 for ECA and ARMD on options for setting up universal service funds, and to 
support the effective alignment, implementation, and sustainability of connectivity investments under the project 
through technical training, covering software and ICT use, and additional advisory services, including for 
policymakers (Djibouti, Ethiopia). 
(d) 
Financing, TA and capacity building to expand the EAC ONA initiative through membership of the two countries in 
ONA allowing the elimination of roaming charges for mobile phones between participating countries. (Djibouti, 
Ethiopia) 
(e) 
TA for capacity-building training to strengthen and guarantee the effectiveness of the regulatory authority, 
specifically towards i) implementing the regulation of security practices of companies and internet service 
providers (both countries); ii) guaranteeing the protection of users’ privacy in relation to operators (how to put 
into practice Book 1 of Djibouti’s Digital Code focused on the protection of personal data) (Djibouti). 
Component 2. Data Market Development and Integration (US$7.7 million IDA equivalent) 
30. 
This component will foster the development of a regional data market by enabling more affordable, secure, 
and seamless data exchange and sharing across borders. It will finance the design of regional data infrastructure to 
reduce the latency and costs of data sharing within the region, as well as build on the regional harmonization efforts under 
SOP-I and enhance and harmonize data governance through improved national and regional frameworks, including in 
areas such as cross-border data flows. Financing will also be provided to strengthen cybersecurity incident response. 
Capacity-building workshops and training will be provided for representatives of the public and private sectors.65 
Subcomponent 2.1. Cybersecurity frameworks, infrastructure and capacity (US$6 million IDA equivalent) 
31. 
This subcomponent will strengthen cybersecurity governance, critical information infrastructure protection, 
and incident response capabilities in the region. Project financing will cover the following:  
 
64 ECA has requested support for mapping and monitoring network coverage to track fulfilment of universal service obligations by operators. Energy 
efficient equipment will be used, in compliance with international standards, and disposal of legacy materials will follow climate-informed e-Waste 
policies with regard to repair, recycling, reuse principles. 
65 All training and workshops conducted will be in formats compliant with accessibility standards (appropriate headers, landmarks, labeling, alternative 
text, and so on). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 14  
 
(a) 
TA to conduct a national Cybersecurity Capacity Maturity Model assessment and develop national and sectoral 
cybersecurity strategies,66 and related implementation plans (These activities will target both Ethiopia). 
(b) 
TA to enhance critical information infrastructure protection, including conducting a national cybersecurity risk 
assessment, identifying key critical information infrastructure, and developing a risk management framework and 
related cybersecurity baselines (Ethiopia). 
(c) 
TA for capacity building, and systems (hardware and software) for strengthening the existing Cybersecurity Incident 
Response Team (CIRT)67 through (i) conducting a CIRT maturity assessment and enhancement plan and (ii) assessing 
and enhancing sectoral incident response capabilities (Ethiopia). 
(d) 
TA and financing toward cybersecurity training, workshops, and awareness campaigns targeting public and private 
sector employees, ICT professionals, and the public. This might include working with dedicated national or regional 
cybersecurity training centers in the region (Ethiopia). 
(e) 
TA for a feasibility study for establishing regionally oriented training centers on cybersecurity; and cyber-criminality 
(Djibouti). 
 
Subcomponent 2.2. Data exchange, governance, and protection (US$0.9 million equivalent) 
32. 
This subcomponent will support investments in enabling data infrastructure and data governance frameworks 
that facilitate cost-effective and secure data exchange in the region. It will build on the regional harmonization efforts 
under SOP-I and focus on identifying avenues for regional data hosting and enabling and promoting interoperability. 
Project financing will cover the following: 
(a) 
TA and subsequent financing to assess regional data hosting (including adoption of a cloud-based approach and 
green standards) and data management needs, looking at demand and supply, regional demand aggregation, need 
for disaster recovery sites (in climate-safe locations), and options for attracting private sector investment and 
scope for strategic partnerships (Ethiopia, Djibouti).  
(b) 
Financing certifications for the national IXP68 (Ethiopia).  
(c) 
TA and capacity building to harmonize national legal, strategic, and institutional frameworks for data sharing 
within the region, based on common principles in the treatment of cross-border data (for example, facilitating 
signature of Convention 108+), to promote interoperability of data across the region through implementation of 
robust data protection standards, such as ISO 27007, by public and private entities (Ethiopia). 
(d) 
The provision of technical assistance and support to assess the feasibility and scope for creating a sovereign cloud. 
(Djibouti). 
Component 3. Online Market Development and Integration (US$13.8 million IDA equivalent) 
33. 
This component will aim to build the regional online market by reducing barriers to cross-border digital trade 
and investing in key enablers for digital skills development. Activities will support the development of national 
governance frameworks on e-commerce (including harmonization with regional frameworks) and facilitate the countries’ 
 
66 Cybersecurity strategies are expected to complement the ongoing cybersecurity policy efforts, including Digital Ethiopia 2025 and the working draft 
of the National Cybersecurity Strategy developed by the efforts of the Information Network Security Agency (INSA). This contributes toward the 
development of a national cybersecurity policy. 
67 Ethio CERT was established in 2012 and is a member of the Forum of Incident Response and Security Team (FIRST). 
68 A federated national system of IXPs is being financed under the Ethiopia Digital Foundations Project (P171034). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 15  
 
participation in regional and global trade agreements. This component will also develop the regional digital skills base 
more broadly, through support for establishing and expanding NRENs and digital skills training programs. 
Subcomponent 3.1. Digital enablers for cross-border trade and service delivery (US$1.3 million IDA equivalent) 
34. 
This subcomponent will enhance readiness to expand digitally enabled cross-border trade and service delivery, 
by introducing key enablers. With a view to supporting the e-Commerce Protocol under AfCFTA and leveraging the 
development of an e-commerce Strategy for IGAD under SOP-I, this subcomponent will support a regional approach to 
digital trade through enhancing e-commerce strategies and capacity building for national trade ministries. Project 
financing will cover the following: 
(a) 
TA and capacity building toward implementing Ethiopia’s national e-Commerce Strategy,69 which is being 
prepared, and developing a regulatory framework for e-commerce with a focus on improving readiness to 
participate in regional trade agreements such as AfCFTA for the Ministry of Innovation and Technology (MInT), 
Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Trade and Regional Integration (MTRI) (These activities will target 
Ethiopia). 
(b) 
TA to the Ethiopian Government to prepare an offer on digital services under the General Agreement on Trade in 
Services to facilitate Ethiopia’s participation in the WTO (Ethiopia). 
Subcomponent 3.2. Research and education networks and training for digital skills (US$12 million IDA equivalent) 
35. 
This subcomponent will support the development of the digital skills base through strengthening the NREN in 
Ethiopia (EthERNet) and establishing a new one in Djibouti. It will enable the expansion and strengthening of the regional 
infrastructure supporting HEIs, regional training centers and schools by promoting closer regional collaboration among 
NRENs, allowing for economies of scale and knowledge transfer. In collaboration with the Education Global Practice, and 
in accordance with the recommendations of Ethiopia’s Digital Skills’ Country Action Plan70, support will be provided to 
enhance the capacity of universities and TVETs,71 in partnership with NRENs and governments, to deliver digital skills 
programs for university students, government officials and refugees and members of host communities. All skills’ 
programs will be encouraged to adapt pedagogical tools and techniques with a view to being accessible for people with 
disabilities. Digital skills’ training along with provision of connectivity supported under subcomponent 1.2 is expected to 
unlock access to financial inclusion, social protection schemes, services such as education, and livelihood opportunities, 
particularly for refugees and host communities. Project financing will cover the following: 
(a) 
Financing support for the establishment of a Djibouti NREN, including through prepurchase of international 
internet access; payment of membership fees for the European Union (EU) AfricaConnect Phase 4 program72; 
purchase of network equipment and campus Wi-Fi networks; and support for staffing, equipment, and business 
planning for sustainability (Djibouti). 
(b) 
Financing for collaboration between NRENs in the region, notably KENET, EthERNet, SomaliREN, and the new 
national NRENs to be established in Djibouti and South Sudan through regional capacity-building initiatives (study 
 
69 The e-Commerce Strategy is being jointly developed by MInT and MTRI with support from the Tony Blair Institute. 
70 Ministry of Education. 2021. Digital Skills Action Plan. 
71 In Ethiopia, TVETs are part of the Ministry of Labor and Skills while other HEIs are part of the MoE. 
72 https://africaconnect3.net/. Phase 3 ends in June 2023, but countries will be eligible to join the EU AfricaConnect Phase 4, to start in 2024. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 16  
 
tours and workshops), demand aggregations, extension of Eduroam73 and regional access to open educational 
resources (Djibouti, Ethiopia). 
(c) 
TA for the development of a long-term business plan for sustainable EthERNet, Ethio ICT Park, and talent centers 
expansion (Ethiopia). 
(d) 
Financing toward connecting and providing ICT equipment (following best practice energy efficiency standards) 
to up to additional 50 national universities74 and a minimum of seven TVET regional centers of excellence.75 In 
Ethiopia, in addition, priority institutions in woredas hosting refugees targeted under sub-component 1.2 will be 
connected and ICT equipment provided. Criteria for selection of universities, and support packages will be defined 
based on government prioritization, and competitive selection mechanisms (Ethiopia).  
(e) 
Financing for the design and implementation of new and expanded digital skills programs76 aimed at expanding 
the availability of digital skills trainings focusing on basic digital skills courses and specialized courses on 
cybersecurity, cloud technologies, data center management and data protection, through existing HEIs, targeting 
university students and civil servants,77 through UNHCR targeting refugees, members of host communities and 
female beneficiaries through a custom pilot digital skills program (Ethiopia). 
Component 4. Project Management and Implementation Support (US$6.5 million IDA equivalent) 
 
36. 
This component will finance project management and implementation of project-associated activities. The 
project will be implemented through the existing national Project Implementation Units (PIUs) in Ethiopia (within MInT) 
and Djibouti (within MCPT) that were both established in 2021 through ongoing World Bank-financed projects.78 This 
component will cover operating costs for the project and help strengthen and expand the technical and functional capacity 
of the existing PIUs, including through the recruitment of additional expert consultants in key areas and the facilitation of 
on-the-job learning and competency transfer. Expanding capacity of existing PIUs will also entail bringing on board 
additional partner agencies such as the RSS (in Ethiopia), along with UNHCR in an advisory capacity to support on activities 
supporting refugees and host communities. It will support independent audits and M&E (including collection and analysis 
of gender-disaggregated data) and enable collaboration between regional (IGAD) and national PIUs through joint trainings, 
reverse missions, and participation in regional forums and exchanges. This component will also support Environmental 
and Social Framework (ESF) compliance, with a particular emphasis on addressing the high security-related risks associated 
with the deployment of infrastructure and civil works, including hosting stakeholder consultations, a robust grievance 
redress mechanism, and development of site-specific environmental and social plans, especially in woredas hosting 
refugees.   
Component 5. Contingent Emergency Response Component (US$0) 
37. 
This component will allow for rapid reallocation of uncommitted IDA funds in the event of an eligible emergency 
declared in one of the participating countries. A Continency Emergency Response Component (CERC) annex to the Project 
Implementation Manual (PIM) is currently being prepared to guide the activation and implementation of the CERC, 
 
73 Eduroam is an international Wi-Fi internet access roaming service for users in research, higher education and further education.  
74 Already, some 40 universities and 30 TVETs are being connected with high-speed connectivity under Digital Ethiopia (P171034). 
75 East Africa Skills for Transformation and Regional Integration Project, EASTRIP (P163399) has designated seven TVETs as regional centers of excellence 
which are being supported with programs for ICT skills and require complementary support on connectivity and ICT equipment. 
76 Digital Ethiopia (P171034) is funding the rollout of training in International Computer Driver’s License (ICDL) and international certificate program for 
digital competency, and this can be expanded under EARDIP SOP-II and also extended to Djibouti. 
77 In selecting HEIs with whom to work, the project will take account of the Regional Centers of Excellence established under East Africa Skills for 
Transformation and Regional Integration Project, (EASTRIP; P163399) and African Centers of Excellence-II (ACE-II; P151847). 
78 Digital Ethiopia (P171034) and Digital Djibouti (P174461). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 17  
 
including agreed on steps needed for activation of CERC. For the CERC to be activated and financing to be provided, the 
recipient will need to (a) submit a request letter for CERC activation and the evidence required to determine eligibility of 
the emergency, as defined in the CERC annex; (b) submit an Emergency Action Plan, including the emergency expenditures 
to be financed; and (c) meet the environmental and social requirements as agreed in the Emergency Action Plan and 
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). Any WHR resources that are moved to the CERC will only be used to 
benefit refugees and host communities.
C. Project Beneficiaries 
38. 
The project will benefit people of the region, targeting specifically youth and women, refugees, businesses, and 
public sector Ministries, Departments, and Agencies (MDAs). 
(a) 
Citizens. Broadband network coverage (of the population79) is expected to increase from 85 to 98 percent of the 
total population in Ethiopia and from 90 to near 100 percent in Djibouti, and approximately 11,000 students80, of 
whom at least 30 percent are women, 25 percent are members of refugees and host community groups81 each, 
also including persons with disabilities82, will also benefit directly from digital skills trainings (conducted using 
accessible techniques and tools). 
(b) 
Refugees, host communities. Refugees in approximately 26 refugee camps in the Gambela, Somali, and Afar 
regions of Ethiopia (approximately 740,000 in total) and their host communities (approximately 1,600,000) within 
the woredas where they are hosted, will benefit indirectly from enhanced network coverage and new access to 
mobile and emergency response ICT infrastructure. Specifically, 500,000 refugees (68 percent of the refugee 
population) and 500,000 members of host communities (31 percent of the host community) will benefit directly 
with new or enhanced access to internet connectivity. Further a minimum of 2,500 individuals from the refugee 
and host communities each will be provided trainings in digital skills.   
(c) 
Businesses. ICT service providers, including mobile network operators, wholesale fiber network operators, and 
Internet Service Providers (ISPs), will directly benefit from the project through contracts for infrastructure 
deployment and internet prepurchase as well as local procurement of ICT services, awarded on a competitive 
basis. 
(d) 
Public sector. MDAs, particularly line ministries for ICT and trade, and ICT regulatory bodies in Ethiopia and 
Djibouti, will directly benefit from targeted financial and TA. Public institutions (including unconnected 
government offices, universities, and TVETs) will also benefit from improved access to connectivity.
D. Results Chain 
39. 
The project’s Theory of Change explains how the project’s activities respond to key challenges to achieve the 
desired outcomes while noting those assumptions that apply (Figure 2). Component 1 responds to the regional gaps in 
connectivity access; the digital divide between urban and rural, borderland areas including refugee camps, host 
communities; and issues of service affordability by expanding broadband infrastructure and stimulating private sector 
investment. Support on digital access for refugees and host communities is expected to address the need for more 
efficient, and transparent delivery of humanitarian aid (e.g., better targeting and communication with beneficiaries using 
mobile technologies) and is expected to contribute towards improved social protection programs. Component 2 addresses 
issues of weak data exchange and cybersecurity risks through financing hardware, software, and TA toward establishing a 
 
79 Note that population coverage is generally much higher than the actual number of subscribers but lower than the territory covered. 
80 Approximately one quarter of the population of Ethiopia and Djibouti are students. 
81 Up to five per cent of the population of Ethiopia are refugees or members of hot communities. 
82 Up to 15 percent of the population of Djibouti and Ethiopia and persons with disabilities. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 18  
 
trusted and secure data environment. Component 3 helps build an integrated online market through facilitating regional 
trade and investing in digital skills, bringing more people online including refugees and members of host communities. 
Component 4 supports project management and ensures that capacity is developed throughout public institutions to 
ensure sustainability. Key assumptions include the following: (a) no political or economic shocks will change the underlying 
economic and fiscal environment or, if they do, project implementation will not be affected, as the project does not rely 
on government counterpart funding; (b) governments remain committed to supporting competition and adopting 
proposed legal and regulatory frameworks, including on refugee protection; (c) the private sector is willing to invest in 
expanding infrastructure and will direct that investment in areas targeted by the project; and (d) citizens including target 
groups of students, refugees and host community members choose to subscribe to the newly available services with the 
existing sensitization efforts carried on through universities, and partner agencies such as UNHCR. 
Figure 2. Results Chain  
 
 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
40. 
The World Bank is uniquely positioned to support the region’s digital transformation as the proposed ecosystem 
approach for integration of digital markets has been tested in several World Bank interventions. The project builds on 
the first generation of regional digital investment operations, including the Regional Communications Infrastructure 
Program (RCIP, P094103) implemented in Eastern and Southern Africa, the West African Regional Communications 
Infrastructure Program (WARCIP, P116273), and the Central Africa Backbone Project (CAB, P108368). These operations 
have helped lay the foundation for incrementally supporting the integration of regional digital markets, through early 
investments in connectivity infrastructure, expanding the region’s access to cheaper international connectivity.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 19  
 
41. 
Development partners have been consulted throughout project preparation to ensure coordination. The project 
is proposed as an integral part of the broader HoA Regional Initiative, implemented together with the AfDB and EU. A high 
degree of complementarity is also expected with other planned HoA lending programs. Consultations included technical 
discussions with development finance institutions, notably the HoA Initiative Secretariat, AfDB on its Horn of Africa Digital 
Integration Project, the EU on its Initiative for Digital Government and Cybersecurity, the International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU) on its support for affordable access to broadband, Smart Africa’s internet bulk internet capacity purchase 
program, and the EU AfricaConnect program for NRENs. Finally, regarding the project’s support for refugees and host 
communities, particularly in Afar and Somali regions, the project will complement support from the PROSPECTS group 
(PROSPECTS partners in Ethiopia include ILO, UNHCR, UNICEF, World Bank, and the IFC).83  
42. 
A World Bank Group-wide approach will be leveraged to address market failures and stimulate and crowd in 
the private sector. Research across deployment of broadband infrastructure has shown84 how certain environments may 
exhibit a market failure due to scarcity of capital, excessive uncertainty, insecurity, crowding out by SOEs, and 
undervaluation of public good benefits. This is characteristic of markets in both Djibouti and Ethiopia, where all these 
conditions hold. In this case, public sector investment may be required to stimulate demand and de-risk investments to 
crowd in additional capital from the private sector. Like the two national programs, this project has been designed to 
attract contributions in the form of UCF. The project will also explore additional incentives to attract the private sector, 
such as leveraging potential downstream support from IFC or the IDA Private Sector Window for financing or MIGA for 
guarantees—if deemed feasible --during project implementation.85   
 
Project Cost and Financing 
43. 
IDA financing. The project will be financed through IDA grant in the amount of US$110 million to Ethiopia and an 
IDA Credit in the amount of US$20 million to Djibouti. The IDA grants and credit provided to the two countries will be 
financed by both national and regional IDA, based on a 2:1 financing ratio. Further, the IDA grant to Ethiopia includes 
US$30 million provided through the WHR window. See Table 3 below for details of financing split.  
Table 3: IDA Project Financing 
 
 
IDA CREDIT 
IDA GRANT 
TOTAL 
Country 
National PBA 
Regional Window 
National PBA 
Regional Window 
WHR Window 
 
Djibouti 
US$6.67 million 
US$13.3 million 
-- 
-- 
-- 
US$20 million 
Ethiopia 
-- 
-- 
US$26.67 million 
US$53.33 million 
US$30 million 
US$110 million 
 
44. 
PCM. Financing (US$96.5 million equivalent) in cross-border and backbone connectivity (under Subcomponents 
1.1 and 1.2) is expected to catalyze direct private sector investment in broadband infrastructure in the amount of 
approximately US$30 million equivalent in unguaranteed commercial financing (UCF) across the two countries covered by 
the project. Early estimations through consultations with private sector providers and government counterparts reveal 
differing potential public-private financing ratios in the two countries. These reflect the varying levels of development 
(GDP and HDI), market size (population and revenue generated by users), and security context (FCS status), as well as 
 
83 The project design will benefit from experiences in the ongoing Uganda Digital Acceleration Program (P171305) which also targets refugees and host 
communities. 
84 World Bank. 2018. Innovative Business Models for Expanding Fiber-Optic Networks and Closing the Access Gaps.  
85 Examples include IFC’s equity investment in the Safaricom Ethiopia consortium and its proposed investment in Raxio, a data center hosting company. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 20  
 
private sector interest86 and appetite87 for investment in the two countries. In Ethiopia, public financing (US$82 million) is 
expected to catalyze direct private sector investment of approximately US$25 million in broadband infrastructure. The 
public-private financing ratio is expected to be approximately 3:1. In Djibouti, public financing (US$16.5 million) is 
expected to catalyze direct private sector investment of approximately US$5 million in broadband infrastructure. The 
public-private financing ratio is expected to be approximately 3:1.  
45. 
A conservative approach was applied to the PCM calculations. While public-private sector financing ratios in 
comparative schemes in Tanzania (1:2), the Comoros (1:1.5), and elsewhere are known to be higher, conservative estimates 
have been taken due to (a) the low average revenue per user; (b) the impact of unstable foreign exchange rates and national 
shortages of foreign currency on investment costs, including equipment imported from abroad in Ethiopia; (c) lack of a fully 
competitive markets and risks of licensing restrictions; (d) the FCS context of Ethiopia, especially the target beneficiaries of 
refugee camps and host communities, with volatile political and security environments both affecting the investment 
climate and inflating deployment costs; and (e) low private sector appetite to invest capital up front within the time frame 
of project duration (five years). 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
46. 
The project design draws on key insights highlighted by comprehensive analytical work related to digital 
economy and digital market integration. The project builds on the key findings of the Digital Economy for Africa (DE4A) 
Initiative conducted in several countries including Djibouti.88 The project design is also informed by the two recent World 
Development Reports, Digital Dividends89 and Data for Better Lives;90 the Single Digital Market for East Africa report;91 the 
Digital Infrastructure Moonshot for Africa report with the United Nations Broadband Commission and the Global 
Broadband Plan for Refugee Inclusion with UNHCR and Tent.org.92 Two prefeasibility studies were conducted to inform 
the design of this project, with support from World Bank Trust Funds: Horn of Africa Broadband Missing Links Study,93 and 
the Regional Digital Roadmap Study94.  
47. 
The project also draws on the lessons learned from past World Bank digital development investment 
operations. The project supports reform of the analog foundations of the digital economy, notably in regulation of telecom 
and digital financial services, as a key complement to physical infrastructure investments, responding to a key finding from 
 
86 Private sector interest has been determined based on (a) early conversations with incumbent and expected new entrant private sector telecom 
providers in the respective countries, (b) evaluation of existing private sector investments in backbone infrastructure (for example, Safaricom and 
AfriFiber have made significant investments since 2022 in the mobile and fiber network markets in Ethiopia and Djibouti, respectively), and (c) 
consultations with the regulatory agencies to discuss potential licensing arrangements permitting entry of new players (for example, ECA in Ethiopia is 
considering issuing new ISP licenses). 
87 Appetite for private sector investment is evaluated by looking at the total telecommunications sector revenue in the country and determining the 
percentage that may be available for investment in the backbone network. The total telecommunications sector revenue is tabulated by estimating the 
sector’s contribution to GDP or a ground-up analysis of average revenues per user and market size. Industry investment standards are estimated to be 
approximately 15–20 percent of the sector’s total revenues. It is further assumed that a majority of investment is likely to go toward access networks, 
that is, 50–70 percent, and the remainder (up to 30 percent) will be open for investing in backbone networks. Based on this analysis, and with sector 
revenues of up to US$1 billion and US$20 million for Ethiopia and Djibouti, respectively, the financial appetite is tabulated. Sources: Stakeholder 
consultations and internal assessments 
88 World Bank. DE4A website. https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/all-africa-digital-transformation.  
89 World Bank. 2016. World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends. Washington, DC: World Bank.  
90 World Bank. 2021. World Development Report 2021: Data for Better Lives. Washington, DC: World Bank.  
91 World Bank. 2019. A Single Digital Market for East Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.  
92 UN Broadband Commission. 2020. Connecting Africa through Broadband: A Strategy for Doubling Connectivity by 2021 and Reaching Universal Access 
by 2030. Geneva: UN Broadband Commission.  
93 See: https://www.hoainitiative.org/missing-broadband-links-in-the-horn-of-africa-region/  
94 World Bank, MacMillan Keck and Acacia Economics. 2022. Roadmap for Regional Digital Integration in Eastern Africa. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 21  
 
IEG95. The report highlights the need for a stronger focus on demand-side investments in digital skills and applications 
development, building on gains in internet connectivity to produce tangible results. The successful investment modalities 
of matching investments, reverse auctions and pre-purchase of internet capacity, used in projects in Malawi and Tanzania, 
are being leveraged in the project design. The project will also identify and incorporate any early lessons from existing 
ongoing digital projects supporting refugees and host communities such as the Uganda Digital Acceleration Project 
(P171305).

A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
48. 
National level. In line with the implementation arrangements for SOP-1, SOP-II will work with two separate PIUs, 
hosted by the MCPT in Djibouti and MInT in Ethiopia, which are currently implementing national projects (see Annex 1 
and figure 1.1), albeit supplemented with additional experts, as required to carry out operational functions. For instance, 
in Djibouti, the PIU is expected to be expanded through the hiring of a project coordinator, a procurement specialist, a 
financial management (FM) specialist, and key thematic experts (as needed) by effectiveness. For Ethiopia, additionally, a 
specialist in refugee affairs will be recruited. Each PIU will perform their work with their respective ‘partner agencies’ 
(MInT, ECA, EthERNet and RSS in Ethiopia; MCPT, MDENI and ARMD in Djibouti) to guide implementation of specific 
activities and resolve any technical issues or related decision-making for implementation and supervision. In Ethiopia, the 
PIU will also be supported by UNHCR in an advisory capacity. Coordination arrangements will be set out in the Project 
Implementation Manual (PIM) and through memoranda of understanding (MoUs) signed between the PIU and partner 
agencies. The PIUs will report to their PSC in each country, which will provide the function of oversight and supervision. 
IGAD will also provide observers for the PSCs. 
49. 
Regional level. Through SOP-I, support is being provided to set up the PIUs and Project Steering Committee (PSC) 
at the REC level in both the EAC and IGAD. A Project Coordination Committee (PCC) will be set up to facilitate interaction 
between the two RECs and encourage coordination between the RECs and the national-level PIUs under both SOP-I and 
SOP-II.  The PCC will allow for coordination on activities between the two SOP as well, notably for component 2 on 
coordination of cybersecurity and data protection. 
50. 
Regional-national level collaboration. The PIUs will also interact with IGAD, at the regional level, as both Djibouti 
and Ethiopia are IGAD members. Although neither country is an EAC member, they are nevertheless expected to benefit 
from work on regional harmonization carried out at the EAC level, for instance through observer status or by incorporating 
regional protocols into national guidelines, e.g., on cross-border fiber crossings and arrangements for ‘no man’s land’.96 
IGAD’s close collaboration with EAC under SOP-I will allow for IGAD member states to benefit indirectly. (Figure 1.1 in 
Annex 1 depicts the reporting lines). 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
51. 
The M&E system is designed to assess whether implementation of the project is on track to achieve its 
objectives and expected results. Progress in the achievement of project results will be measured by tracking the indicators 
established in the Results Framework. In Ethiopia, data will also be geographically-disaggregated by those woredas hosting 
refugee camps. National-level PIUs will bear the primary responsibility for M&E and will establish standardized formats and 
 
95 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG). 2011. Capturing Technology for Development. https://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/evaluations/capturing-
technology-development.  
96 See, for example, East Africa Communications Organisation (EACO). 2021. EACO Infrastructure Sharing Guidelines. 
https://eaco.int/admin/docs/publications/EACO%20Infrastructure%20sharing%20Guidelines_%20July%202021%20(1).pdf.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 22  
 
guidelines for data collection and reporting, supplemented by satellite data and surveys, as required (for instance to gather 
gender statistics), and will organize training sessions for project stakeholders in their use.  
C. Sustainability 
52. 
The design of the project builds in a number of mechanisms to ensure sustainability, as indicated in table 4. 
Table 4. Sustainability Mechanisms by Project Component 
Component 
Sustainability Mechanisms 
Component 1. Connectivity 
Market Development and 
Integration 
(a) The financing model adopted for connectivity expansion (Subcomponents 1.1 and 1.2) will 
mobilize additional financing through competitive bidding among network operators, ensuring 
value for money, while shifting the financial risk associated with operation/maintenance of 
infrastructure to network operators and ISPs.  
(b) The borderlands initiative (Subcomponent 1.2), expanding connectivity for public institutions 
and refugee camps and their host communities in borderland areas, will be facilitated through 
a competitive bidding process that awards long-term supply contracts for internet capacity to 
winning bidders and awards long-term indefeasible rights of use (IRU) contracts that continue 
beyond the project closing date to the winning bidders, with up-front payment of operations 
and maintenance costs.  
Component 2. Data Market 
Development and Integration 
(a) TA and investments in regional harmonization of data infrastructure (IXPs, CDNs, and data 
centers in Subcomponent 2.1) will complement investments at the national level.  
(b) Benefits of capacity developed in training of government officials (on data governance, 
cybersecurity, and so on in Subcomponent 2.2) within MDAs will be retained after project 
closing. 
Component 3. Online Market 
Development and Integration 
(a) The model of supporting regional connectivity through NRENs (Subcomponent 3.2), and the 
new NREN in Djibouti, will allow for demand aggregation and achieving economies of scale and 
knowledge transfer that will outlive the project. 
(b) Digital skills programs (Subcomponent 3.2) will create a wider digital consumer base, boosting 
demand and incentivizing expanded and continued digital services provision by network 
operators and ISPs. 
Component 4. Project 
Management and 
Implementation Support 
(a) Implementation will leverage existing PIUs to avoid creating an additional burden on the 
Government.  
(b) Capacity building within the Government through training will allow for sustainable 
continuation of the activities beyond the project life cycle.

A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis  
53. 
A cost-benefit analysis reveals financial viability. A CBA97 model was used to run a cash flow and financial analysis 
that features three different scenarios: optimistic,98 pessimistic,99 and neutral. Where possible, the model also ran a 
sensitivity analysis at the country level to quantify the benefits and costs attributable to the project against current 
baseline indicators, taking into account exchange rate distortions. In the neutral scenario, the overall NPV is estimated at 
 
97 The CBA model relies on available secondary data and reasonable assumptions, based on experience, and additional evidence sourced from 
consultations, interviews conducted, and other single digital markets interventions. The model assumes 80 percent of financing will be in USD, and 20 
percent in national currency expenditure.  
98 In the optimistic scenario, the NPV is expected to reach US$181 million and the IRR is expected to be 62 percent. 
99 Even under the pessimistic scenario, the NPV is still expected to reach US$87.45 million and the IRR is expected to be 38 percent. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 23  
 
US$138.82 million (compared with an investment of US$130 million) with an IRR of 51 percent over a 10-year period, with 
a discount rate of 7 percent.  
54. 
At the national level, the activities in Components 1, 2, and 3 are expected to contribute to sustainable 
economic growth, through better equipped and trained digitally enabled citizens. Component 1 is expected to stimulate 
GDP and job growth in the countries100 through investments in backbone and last-mile infrastructure, particularly in 
borderland areas with host communities, refugee camps which remain largely without access. Component 2 is expected 
to reduce possible economic losses and disruptions stemming from increasing cyberattacks, through investments in data 
protection and cybersecurity. Component 3 will result in higher employability and salaries among project beneficiaries, 
through investments in NREN and digital skills. Digital skills programs for vulnerable communities, such as refugees and 
host communities, will allow new income and employment opportunities for groups traditionally out of the workforce. 
Given baseline information on levels of digital literacy, and salaries for refugees and host communities is not available it 
is difficult to estimate benefits accruing specifically for this group. Country level averages have been taken for analysis.   
55. 
At the regional level, spillover effects are expected to accrue from increased GDP on account of greater cross-
border digital trade, and higher taxes and consumer surplus owing to the reduction in prices for connectivity. Cross-
border digital trade and harmonized regulations (Sub-Component 3.1) are anticipated to promote increased regional trade 
flow and trade in digital services. Investments in cross-border connectivity are projected to reduce unit prices, resulting 
in higher consumer surplus. Comparable interventions in other regions such as the Economic Community of West African 
States (ECOWAS), 101 EU, and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), have demonstrated significant consumer surplus figures 
per inhabitant.102 Following a similar model, the total consumer surplus for Ethiopia and Djibouti is estimated to reach 
US$116.5 million between 2023 and 2029, with a consumer surplus per inhabitant of US$0.4 under the neutral scenario. 
56. 
The operation is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation. 
 
(a) 
Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. The project will manage the main risks of flooding, intense rainfall, 
and extreme heat by developing guidelines for climate-resilient digital infrastructure, using climate-resilient fiber 
optic cables, and enhancing climate-resilience of the population by targeting climate vulnerable areas and 
communities (coastal floods, drought-prone) and strengthening emergency communication facilities to respond 
to climate emergencies. 
(b) 
Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks. The project will contribute to the low-carbon development 
pathway goals of Paris Alignment by embedding energy efficiency requirements in the deployment of cross-
border, national backbone, and last-mile network connectivity. Moreover, new IT equipment and related digital 
infrastructure will follow best practices for energy efficiency and international standards. All new cell towers will 
be supplied with solar power and battery storage. On mitigation, the operation will assist the countries’ transition 
to low-carbon development pathways. 
 
 
100  A 10 percent increase in mobile broadband penetration in developing countries is associated with a 2.46 percent increase in GDP growth. Source: 
ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2020. How Broadband, Digitization and ICT Regulation Impact the Global Economy: Global Econometric 
Modelling. Geneva: ITU. 
101 Source: Western Africa ECOWAS Regional Communications. 2018. Towards Integration of Infrastructure and Services. World Bank Digital 
Development. 
102 World Bank. 2022. Good Practices and Global Trends in Digital Trade Regulation: Presenting a New Database on Digital Trade Regulatory Readiness; 
Consumer surplus outcomes were as follows on a per-inhabitant basis: US$0.6 for ECOWAS, US$5.0 for EU, and US$1.8 for GCC.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Eastern Africa Regional Digital Integration Project SOP-II (P180931) 
 
 
Page 24  
 
B. Fiduciary 
(i) Financial Management 
57. 
FM capacity assessments. FM assessments were undertaken for the implementing agencies (MInT, in Ethiopia, as 
well as MCPT, in Djibouti) in accordance with the FM Manual for World Bank Investment Project Financing Operations, 
reissu