[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 120000 chars → Filtered: 101883 chars (15.1% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
 
1. 
Djibouti is a relatively small country located strategically in the Horn of Africa.  It has borders with 
Ethiopia along the west and southwest, Eritrea along the northwest, Somalia on the southeast, and the Gulf of 
Aden to the east.  It is one of the smallest countries in Africa with a total land area of about 23,200 square 
kilometers1 and is divided into six administrative regions: the capital city of Djibouti, Ali Sabieh, Arta, Dikhil, Obock, 
and Tadjourah2.   
 
2. 
Djibouti’s main resources are its strategic location and people. This access to the coastline allows Djibouti 
to play a crucial and oversized role in regional trade, including with Ethiopia.  Djibouti is an arid country with nearly 
nine-tenths of its land area classified as desert, and with little arable land.  About 9 percent of land is considered 
as pastureland and about 1 percent are forests.  Arid lands scattered with shrubs dominate the landscape which 
consists of plateaus, plains, volcanic formations, and mountain ranges3.  Djibouti has limited natural resources and 
is prone to natural disasters which can be further exacerbated by water scarcity, poor water management, and 
poor land-use planning.   Precipitation is truly scarce and does not support an agricultural base and requiring 
Djibouti to import nearly all of its food requirements4.  Therefore, the economy is quite dependent on the service 
sector, specifically the commercial activities that supports the trade sector given the country’s strategic location 
as a Red Sea transit point with about two-thirds of the port’s activities supporting imports and exports to and from 
Ethiopia.  The country is home to about a million individuals and is multiethnic in nature with Somalis, Afar and 
Arabs.  Djibouti city accounts for about 70 percent of the country’s population, with the remaining population 
spread across the five regions.  In these administrative regions, the rural share varies quite a bit ranging from 40 
percent of the population in Ali Sabieh to 77 percent in Tadjourah.  On aggregate about 15 percent of the 
population live in rural areas, with the rest residing in the country’s cities and towns.  
 
3. 
Djibouti's stability in an otherwise unstable region has made the country a destination for refugees 
from neighboring countries.   The fragile, conflict and violence (FCV) context in countries surrounding Djibouti, 
heightens the need for the country to respond to the needs of refugees and host communities and prepare for 
likely future refugee flows, asylum seekers and migrants.  Unrest in neighboring countries has forced refugees to 
seek shelter in Djibouti since the mid-seventies.  United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) update 
on refugees and asylum seekers in Djibouti as of January 31, 2022, states that there are 34,810 such individuals in 
the country.  These populations are concentrated in three regions - Djibouti City (7111), Ali Sabieh (24886) and 
Obock (2813).  There are two locations within Ali Sabieh - Ali-Addeh (17018) and Holl-Holl (7868).  These numbers 
represent the total number of refugees and asylum seekers, with the number of refugees only in these locations 
amounting to: Djibouti City (5864), Ali Sabieh (14743) and Obock (2813).  The numbers in the two locations of Ali-
Sabieh being as follows - Ali-Addeh (11797) and Holl-Holl (2946).  This represents a total of 8865 households with 
3033 in Djibouti, 2454 in Holl-Holl, 4442 in Ali-Addeh, and 1614 in Obock.   Approximately 54.53 percent are men 
 
1 Djibouti is often referred to as one of the smallest countries in Africa and this is accurate.  It is the 8th smallest country in Africa with only Eswatini, the 
Gambia, Capo Verde, the Comoros, Mauritius, Sao Tome and Principe and the Seychelles being smaller.  However, relative to other regions of the world it is 
not that small.  For example, Israel, Kuwait, and Singapore are all smaller than Djibouti in size (Wikipedia, https://www.nationmaster.com/country-
info/stats/Geography/Land-area/Sq.-km). 
2 Which are also names of townships in these districts. 
3 Some of these mountains are about 2,000 meters (m) in height. 
4 The country recently leased tracts of land in Ethiopia to grow food in an attempt to lower its import bill.  Facts in paragraph 2 are also from the same 
source. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 68  
     
 
and 45.47 percent are women of the overall refugee population.  A majority of these individuals (57.47 percent) 
are between the ages of 18-59 years or the working age group.  Approximately 38 percent of the refugee 
population is less than 17 years of age.  The current number of refugees and asylum seekers constitutes about 
3.4% of the total population living in Djibouti, making it one of the countries with a significant ratio of refugees 
and asylum seekers/population in the world.  The share of refugees only is about 2.34 percent of the overall 
population of the country.   Educational attainment is very low across the population of refugees and asylum 
seekers with 53 percent of the population having no schooling at all.  Figure 1 below illustrates attainment across 
the population of refugees and asylum seekers. 
 
 
FIGURE 1 
SCHOOLING YEARS AMONG REFUGEE AND ASYLUM SEEKER POPULATION 
 
Source: UNHCR (2022) 
 
4. 
Djibouti is considered highly vulnerable to climate change.  While strategic location defines much of 
Djibouti's current economic growth strategy, location is also a concern for Djibouti when considering the impacts 
of climate change and the trends expected to be seen in the coming years.  The Notre Dame Global Adaptation 
Initiative (ND-GAIN) Index places Djibouti at 117 out of 181 countries, implying that the country is vulnerable to 
climate change impacts and is expected to experience adverse impacts from increased temperatures, aridity, 
reduced precipitation, and rising sea levels5. Mean annual temperatures are projected to increase by 1°C every 
twenty years, with monthly average temperatures expected to rise by 1.9°C by the 2050s and a staggering 4.5°C 
by 2100. These temperature increases are likely to be associated with intense heat waves, with cold spells and 
cold nights expected to decrease which will have significant consequences for human, animal health, biodiversity, 
and water resources. Precipitation patterns are less clear, with a marginal increase in rainfall patterns expected 
 
5 World Bank (2021), Djibouti Climate Risk Country Profile, The World Bank. 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Number
Schooling Years
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 68  
     
 
through to the end of the century, although the timing of precipitation is likely to impact both livestock grazing 
periods tended to by nomadic groups and for the very small part of the country that supports agriculture. The 
country is highly vulnerable to droughts, floods, heat waves, and earthquakes. Its strategic coastline also increases 
exposure to risks posed by sea level rise, and thereby potentially affecting the country's strategic port assets and 
its ability to use tourism as means of economic growth. As one of the most water scarce countries in the world, 
these climate related events would continue to play havoc with human and livestock populations in the coming 
century.  Further studies are needed to better understand some of these anticipated patterns in Djibouti to 
improve government’s planning and preparation.  For example, recent studies using data from 14 weather stations 
covering the period 1946-2017, illustrates spatial and temporal variability and specifically identifies two spatially 
coherent regions - eastern coast and western inland areas of the country, and across January-February (JF); March-
May (MAM); June-September (JJAS); and October-December (OND) over the year. The study also notes significant 
positive correlation in rainfall variability with Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) and OND period, and negative correlation 
between JJAS and El Niño Southern Oscillations (ENSO).   The Project will emphasize green investments (e.g., water 
harvesting systems, renewable energy options for Technical and Vocational Education Training (TVET) institutions 
where possible, etc.) and incorporate foundational classes on the country’s vulnerability to climate change as a 
core course for all students and trainees in long term (greater than a year old) skills development programs. 
 
5. 
Djibouti is a lower-middle income economy with a nominal gross domestic product (GDP) equivalent to 
US$2.6 billion in 2016 (DISED6).  For nearly two decades, Djibouti has experienced sustained and strong economic 
growth.  For a decade between 2003 and 2013, real GDP growth averaged around 4.5 percent per year, this 
increased to about 7 percent per year between 2013 and 20167, and the country has witnessed economic growth 
rates of 8.4 percent and 7.5 percent in 2018 and 2019 respectively.  This relatively rapid growth in recent years, 
driven mainly by investments in physical capital, rent from military bases, and the importance of the transport 
and logistics sector, however, has not been inclusive and has not resulted in improved development outcomes for 
its citizens and residents8. 
 
6. 
Therefore, Djibouti remains a relatively poor country and with high levels of inequality.  About 21 
percent of the population is characterized as being extremely poor according to estimates based on the official 
poverty line of about US$2.17 a day 2011 PPP or spending less than DJF 117,783 per adult equivalent per year.  
Using the World Bank’s (2018b) poverty line for lower middle-income economies of US$3.20 a day (2011 PPP), 
appropriate for an economy at Djibouti’s level of development, the extreme poverty rate would be closer to 32 
percent.  Inequality in Djibouti is one of the highest in the Middle East and North Africa Region (MENA) region 
with an estimated Gini coefficient of 0.42 and where the highest income decile consumes about sixteen times as 
much as the lowest decile, and twice that of the ninth decile (World Bank 2019).  Extreme poverty in rural areas 
of the country is significantly higher with about 62.6 percent of the population being classified as such. According 
to UNHCR, in 2017 around 74 percent of the refugees lived on less than US$3 per day. Refugee population 
predominantly lives in the poor neighborhoods of Djibouti City under precarious living conditions where they are 
generally welcomed and develop friendly interactions with host communities. 
 
 
6 Direction Statistique et des Études Démographique. 
7 This impressive record of economic growth puts Djibouti ahead of countries with similar characteristics, such as, Cabo Verde, the Comoros, Sao Tome and 
Principe.  This also places Djibouti’s economic growth record ahead of countries that had similar per capita GDP in 2013, such as, Albania, Guinea-Bissau, 
Mauritius, and Mali (World Bank 2019; http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/825601576251871028/pdf/Challenges-to-Inclusive-Growth-A-
Poverty-and-Equity-Assessment-of-Djibouti.pdf).  
8 The elasticity of growth to employment shows that for every percentage point increase in GDP, employment grows by 0.38 percent. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 68  
     
 
7. 
Capital accumulation has driven Djibouti’s recent growth.  Sustained growth prior to the pandemic has 
been driven by capital accumulation with capital stock growing by 21.4 percent between 2005-2015 and 
contributing to about 12.8 percentage points over this period with total factor productivity remaining negative 
though should signs of improvement.  However, over the same period, labor has grown by only 2 percent, and 
contributed only 0.8 percentage points to growth. 
 
8. 
The government’s policy priorities emphasize jobs and job creation.  The lack of movement in labor helps 
explain growth’s limited impacts on poverty.  Investments in physical capital were not matched by corresponding 
increases in human capital, and thereby gains that could have been exploited by the growth in physical capital did 
not materialize.  Hence, the Government of Djibouti’s increased focus on improving its human capital outcomes, 
by investing in health, social protection, and education services, given the realization that capital accumulation 
alone will not help improve economic growth beyond a certain point but that investing in its people will all the 
country to transition towards a knowledge economy, and allow the population to better harness the opportunities 
that become available. 
 
9. 
The pandemic has significantly slowed economic growth in Djibouti, although it is anticipated that 
growth will pick up as the pandemic is brought under control with increased global access to vaccines.   The 
pandemic slowed Djibouti’s growth in early months of the pandemic due to both the slowdown in global economic 
activity and the government’s own lockdown measures to restrict the spread of the virus.  It was estimated that 
Djibouti would lose about 0.75 percent of GDP per week of general lockdown as it attempted to flatten the curve.  
In the medium- to long-term, economic growth is expected to rebound given successful global efforts in 
controlling the spread of the pandemic since its outbreak.  Economic activity recovered in 2021 due to the fact 
that global and regional trade rebounded and increased the demand for the transport and logistics sector.  GDP 
growth in Djibouti has reached 5.1 percent in 2021, compared to a low of 0.5 percent in 2020. 
   
10. 
Djibouti is keen to harness this growth potential for social and human capital improvements of its 
population and refugees living in the country.  There are numerous growth opportunities and trajectories for 
Djibouti to consider as it continues to consolidate its role as a trade conduit between economic partners including 
Ethiopia, as a base for peace and stability in an otherwise volatile Horn of Africa, and as it ambitiously positions 
itself as a regional digital hub. To ensure that these opportunities lead to sustained improvements in the quality 
of life for its citizens and the refugee population, Djibouti has focused on improving their skills set to help them 
access emerging opportunities, while simultaneously supporting efforts to increase the country’s key growth 
sectors. The government recognizes that the jobs agenda needs to be a central feature of this economic 
transformation, and to ensure that future growth is not a jobless one.  Ensuring that the country has the needed 
stock and flow of education and skills to harness this growth potential is one of the key policy priorities of the 
country. Furthermore, the recognition of refugee skills is an important and growing area in the policy space and 
policy makers recognize that there are qualified individuals whose skills and talents can contribute to the country’s 
economy and that including them in education and training programs could help the labor market integration of 
refugees. 
 
11. 
The COVID-19 crisis has had significant impacts on Djibouti’s educational system across all levels.  The 
transaction of educational services in Djibouti has taken a severe hit due to the COVID-19 crisis, and the 
implications of this will manifest itself in the years to come. The Djiboutian government did respond quickly in the 
early months of the pandemic between March and September 2020 and resorted to alternative learning 
modalities.   Preliminary data from pulse surveys suggests relatively good student participation through these 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 68  
     
 
alternative modalities during this period and this is shown in Table 1.   Since September 2020, schools have largely 
reopened and a majority of children, including those from refugee’s communities have been able to return to 
school, and the few who have not been able to go back to school noted that schools were unprepared to receive 
students (World Bank 2020)9.  Though the preliminary results from pulse surveys have been favorable, more 
detailed work would be needed to truly ascertain both short- and long-term impacts.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 1 
EDUCATION ACCESS IN DJIBOUTI DURING EARLY MONTHS OF THE PANDEMIC (percent) 
Source: World Bank (2020a) 
 
12. 
In line with the Global Compact on Refugees, Djibouti has demonstrated its openness and commitment 
to providing adequate protection to refugees.  Over the last 40 years, Djibouti has taken significant steps towards 
protecting migrants and refugees, including: (a) institutional and legislative strengthening; (b) improving access 
to basic services, particularly education and health10; and (c) promoting social protection and economic 
prosperity.  The National Refugee Law which came into force in 2017 helped to ensure the integration of refugees 
into the national systems such as health, education, and the labor market. The Government of Djibouti meets all 
three criteria to access financing through the IDA19 Window for Host Communities and Refugees (WHR) including: 
 
9 World Bank (2020b), Monitoring COVID 19 Impacts on Households in Djibouti Report No. 2.  Washington DC, November 2020. 
10 Given the significant impact by COVID in Djibouti and recognizing the need to support refugee and migrant populations. the Government has been 
proactive in rolling out COVID-19 Vaccinations for these populations and ensuring access to mental health care. 
  
ALL 
BALBALA 
REST OF 
DJIBOUTI 
CITY 
OTHER 
URBAN 
CENTERS 
NON-
POOR 
TOTAL 
Proportion that watched Educational TV 
programs (Students aged 6-10 years old) 
73.5 
86.0 
75.0 
45.3 
73.4 
73.8 
Proportion that watched Educational TV 
programs (Students aged 11-18 years old) 
82.2 
85.6 
84.8 
73.9 
82.9 
78.9 
Box 1:  COVID 19 Impacts in Djibouti 
The pandemic has disrupted economic activity in Djibouti and while the impact till date has been relatively limited, 
it continues to threaten lives and livelihoods of Djibouti’s citizens.  The first case of the coronavirus disease (COVID-
19) was detected in Djibouti on March 18, 2020.  As an immediate measure, the Government suspended 
international air-travel, and this eventually led to a general lockdown starting March 27, 2020.  Nevertheless, 
Djibouti went on to become the country with the highest prevalence of coronavirus in East Africa at one point in 
time, although this is no longer the case.  Subsequently, all schools, colleges and higher education institutions were 
also ordered to shut down to help prevent the transmission of the virus.  Government restrictions started to be 
eased initially on May 11, 2020, and more fully in the fall of 2020 when schools were reopened. As of February 28, 
2022, there have been about 15,547 confirmed positive cases of COVID-19, with 189 deaths. However, the 
apparently low incidence of COVID-19 should be interpreted with caution due to the unpredictable nature of this 
virus, the inflow of workers from other countries, and the relatively poor health infrastructure in the country.  
Djibouti has administered a total of about 160,785 COVID-19 vaccination doses resulting in vaccinating 140,347 
individuals or about 14.0 percent of the population.  About 100,337 completed vaccination doses have been given 
or about 10.01 percent of the population.  The Djiboutian government started the vaccine campaign in mid-March 
2021.  About 366 doses are administered each day in Djibouti, and at this rate 70 percent of the population would 
be fully vaccinated in 3,394 days or by June 2031. [https://covidvax.live/location/dji].  
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 68  
     
 
(a) with a population of 23,420 refugees only as of January 31, 2022, the refugees constitutes about 2.34 percent 
of the total population living in Djibouti, making it one of the countries with a significant ratio of 
refugees/population in the world; (b) the World Bank Group (WBG) in consultation with UNHCR (February 16, 
2022) has determined that the framework for the protection of refugees remains adequate for the purpose of the 
IDA 19 WHR; and (c) the Government of Djibouti has articulated a strategic approach to move towards long-term 
solutions that benefit refugees and host communities.  
 
13. 
There are also regional efforts to integrate these vulnerable populations.  In 2017, the 
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) member states11 also agreed to take collective responsibility 
to ensure that every refugee, returnee, and members of host communities have access to quality education, 
including skills and competencies, in a safe learning environment without discrimination, and integrate refugees 
into national education policies of IGAD member states, and the declaration also agreed to adopt an action plan 
to support this goal.  The focus on skills and competencies is further strengthened by an effort underway within 
IGAD member states to look at a potential role for skills development and recognition to help support and extend 
the impact of a regional system on labor mobility within and between member states. 
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
B.1 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LABOR MARKET 
 
14. 
Labor force participation rates in Djibouti are low12 and only about 45 percent of the working age 
population of Djibouti, i.e., those who are 15 years old and above, participate in the labor market13.  This has 
restricted the development of a private sector which typically supports job growth and the development of a 
vibrant and dynamic labor market.  The country also has high total unemployment rates and even higher youth 
unemployment rates in the order of about 10.3 percent and 21 percent14 respectively. Refugees are vulnerable 
to economic exclusion; a study of the Government of Djibouti (GoD)15 shows that the employment rate, i.e., the 
proportion of working people in the population aged 15 and over, is 29.2 percent, or less than a third of all refugees 
and asylum seekers. Furthermore, Djibouti has a very large informal sector which also contributes to high rates of 
underemployment and poor quality of employment.   There is significant variation in labor force participation by 
gender and age, with men’s participation rate estimated to be 59 percent compared to only 32 percent for women 
in Djibouti16. This can be attributed to some extent to the significantly high prevalence of Female Genital 
Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C) in Djibouti (93 percent of women) and the multiple underlying links 
between FGM/C, education, and labor force participation17. For those above 25 years of age, the main working 
 
11  Refer to the Djibouti Declaration on Regional Conference on Refugee Education in IGAD Member States, 14 December 2017. 
12 Modeled ILO estimates and retrieved on January 29, 2021, suggests that LFP rates are about 64 percent and that this hides significant differences across 
sub-populations.  Refer to https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.TLF.ACTI.ZS?locations=DJ. 
13 This ratio has remained unchanged over the last 25 years when it was estimated to be about 46.3 percent in 1996 and notwithstanding two decades of 
growth (World Bank, 2019). 
14 There are other documents which suggest that nearly three-fourths of youth are unemployed. These numbers are difficult to corroborate. Especially using 
more standard definitions of unemployment and the age brackets which define youth in Djibouti. 
15 République de Djibouti, 2020, Rapport enquête profilage dans les villages de réfugiés 2019, MASS, INSD, WFP, UNHCR. 
16 Only 14 percent of the women are employed relative to population, while about 38 percent of the men are engaged in work. 
17 The physical and psychological short term and long terms consequences can negatively affect girls who have been subjected to FGM/C from attending 
and/or succeeding school. Moreover, FGM/C is also correlated with early marriage and early pregnancies. FGM/C is often regarded as a rite into womanhood 
and is the prerequisite for a girl to be married and sexually active. FGM/C can thus further lead to girls dropping out of school to become wives and/or 
mothers. FGM/C consequences for a woman’s health negatively affect her productivity and type of employment opportunity. A World Bank sponsored Report 
attributed some of the economic costs of FGM/C to a loss of productive labor through increased mortality or morbidity as direct or indirect consequences of 
the practice, and a decline in productivity (and income) due to FGM/C-related disability linked to the long-term health complications of the practice. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 68  
     
 
age group, participation rates are 55 percent and 53 percent for age cohorts 25-39 years old, and 40-60 years old 
respectively.   There are also high levels of economic inactivity among the youth with only about a third of the 
population in the 15 to 24-year range participating in the labor force18.  This is despite the fact that this cohort 
has a higher level of literacy and a higher share have completed the primary cycle compared to other age cohorts. 
This illustrates the difficulties in making the transition from schooling and training to jobs.  About 45 percent of 
the youth are still in school, while 5 percent are already in the workforce.  However, perhaps the most concerning 
statistic regarding the youth is that nearly 22 percent are unemployed and almost 28 percent are neither in 
education, employment or in training. 
    
15. 
The labor market in Djibouti is highly segmented.    There are three broad buckets into which workers in 
Djibouti can be placed - the small formal private sector which accounts for about 10 percent of those in the 
workforce, the over-bloated public sector, and the sizeable informal private sector.  These two sectors combined 
account for 90 percent of those employed, with about 43 percent working in the public sector19. Refugees, 
particularly skilled and semi-skilled Yemenis refugees, are highly present in the formal and informal private sector. 
No statistics are available on the share of refugees in the labor market, but clear distinction could be made 
between very entrepreneurial and skilled Yemenis and the rest of refugees present in Djibouti. 
 
16. 
Highly qualified and skilled individuals continue to self-select into the public sector which has enormous 
appeal. About half of the public employees (45 percent) have at least a secondary education and the public sector 
accounts for about 70 percent of all Djiboutian workers with this level of education. The public sector offers tenure 
and relatively high wages, and this accounts for the skewed distribution of educated workforce between the 
private and public sectors20 with high skilled workers becoming concentrated in the public sector, while there is 
an over-representation of low-skilled workers on the private sector side.  Formal labor market opportunities are 
less available for working women than for working men, so this results in the informal private sector employing 
63 percent of working women, while a third of women work in the public administration (in contrast to about 48 
percent for men).  The ‘private formal’ market is a small employer and does not recruit people of high skills.  The 
informal private sector is a large employer, and a large employer of unskilled or semi-skilled workers.  Over half 
of the country’s population works in small firms which engage 10 or fewer workers, which in reality translates into 
a large number of one-person retail firms, or individuals working as microentrepreneurs.   This is illustrated below 
in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
 
18 The participation rate for cohorts of the population in the prime working ages of 25-39 years and 40-60 years are 55 and 53 percent respectively.  
19 The formal sector accounts for only about 38700 individuals in the country or about a tenth of the population. 
20 On average, workers in the public sector earn DF 104,161 per month while those in the (informal) private sector earn DF 84,221 per month. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 68  
     
 
FIGURE 2 
SEGMENTATION IN THE DJIBOUTIAN LABOR MARKET 
 
 
 
Source: World Bank 2019 
 
 
17. 
Labor market informality is characteristic of the Djiboutian labor market.   In Djibouti, informality is 
correlated to poverty and vulnerability. Poverty rates are also associated with the sector in which the household 
head works, being six times higher when the household head is employed in the informal private sector as 
compared to when s/he works in the formal sector.  Vulnerability is also higher among those with a household 
head working in the informal sector.  In terms of the development of skills, the informal sector poses significant 
challenges given that it is difficult to forecast the set of the skills needed to support the economic activities 
contained therein and there are many other constraints in the informal sector space, which makes it unlikely that 
training alone will help overcome these constraints. There are many reasons for such labor market characteristics 
including inter alia:  
 
 
Skills gaps:  Existence of significant skills gaps in the market may explain why labor force participation 
rates are low, and Djiboutian workers simply do not have the necessary skills to take advantage of emerging 
opportunities in the formal labor market. 
 
 
Links between education and skills and jobs:  There is a weak positive correlation between employment 
rates and educational attainment in Djibouti, although higher educational attainment by no means guarantees 
greater opportunities in the labor market.  In fact, the concern of skilled unemployment is quite significant.  
While individuals with secondary or more education show higher rates of employment than those with no 
education, there are almost no differences between those with no schooling and those with primary 
schooling. 
 
 
Reservation Wages:  Another perplexing concern is that Djiboutians seem to have a high reservation 
wage, and it is not clear as to why the reservation wage is so high in a country with widespread poverty, high 
30.8
2.5
11.5
2.5
0.4
1.3
9.1
3.2
11
3.9
3.9
19.9
46.3
9.9
43.8
Private Informal
Private Formal
Public Administration
No education/own education
Less than primary
Primary and above, but less than secondary
Secondary and above
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 68  
     
 
unemployment, and not very large amounts of remittances coming into the country from the Djiboutian 
diaspora21. 
 
B.2 
THE SUPPLY SIDE FOR SKILLS DEVELOPMENT 
 
18. 
Education is valued by the Djiboutian population, and this is evidenced in the positive educational 
mobility across the population of the country.  For the overall population of the country, there is evidence of 
positive education mobility for the entire population.  About 36 percent of the population aged 25 years or older, 
have higher educational attainment than their parents' generation, while about 60 percent have the same 
attainment as those in their parent's generation.   There is considerable variation across population subgroups 
with non-poor men showing the greatest mobility rates, while poor women show the least mobility.  The World 
Bank’s Poverty Assessment also estimates returns to schooling, the returns to be employed in the public sector.  
The analysis finds that every additional year of formal education increases wages by 7.8 percent and that working 
in the public sector is associated with a wage premium of 18 percent even after accounting for other worker 
characteristics. 
 
19. 
The Djiboutian schooling system is a 5+4+3 system with 5 years of primary schooling, 4 years of lower 
secondary schooling and 3 years of secondary schooling with Skills Development Programs beginning at the end 
of compulsory schooling.  The pre-primary cycle covers 2 years although access is severely curtailed.   The primary 
and lower secondary cycles are considered as compulsory, and general and vocational secondary programs begins 
after the completion of compulsory schooling.  Students at the secondary level can opt to follow two paths – a 
general education path that spans three years or a technical and vocational education path that spans either one 
or two or three years which is a function of the area of specialization of the student.  Upon completion of the 
compulsory school cycle – primary plus lower secondary – students have the option of studying in one-year, two-
year or three-year cycles.  These are described below: 
 
 
A short cycle of one (1) year after which the trainee leaves the school system and receives the 
qualification of a Certificate of Professional Training. 
 
This is an entry level qualification and is also open to out-of-school youth who do not qualify for 
Certificate of Professional Aptitudes (CAP) and to adults without qualifications, irrespective of whether 
they are employed or not, and who are seeking their first certification. 
 
The CAP offers a two-year cycle and is also opened to school leavers in the 9th year of general 
schooling.  Students who wish to and qualify for continued training, have the opportunity to enter the 
second year of the Diplôme du Baccalauréat professionnel (BAC PRO) cycle which allows for a quicker 
transition into the labor market. 
 
Students who have successfully completed their Year 9 in General Education or holders of the CAP, 
are eligible for the three-year cycle and are eligible to receive the BAC PRO upon completion. 
 
20. 
Each of these levels requires the student/trainee to develop knowledge, attitudes, and practice in their 
specific areas of interest in a manner demonstrating progressive responsibility and capacity to function 
autonomously.  The ratio of theory to practice changes as trainees move from shorter duration programs (1 year) 
 
21 Reservation wages can be high for a number of reasons – for example, overgenerous unemployment benefits making working less desirable and high 
levels of overseas remittances.  For example, in Caribbean Island states and in the Pacific Island Countries, reservations wages are high, fueled by sizeable 
remittances as a percentage of GDP being channeled back to these countries.  This is not the case in Djibouti. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 68  
     
 
to longer term programs (3 years), with higher level trainings requiring trainees to demonstrate the acquisition of 
both theoretical and practical knowledge.  
  
21. 
As part of its support to education, the Ministry of National Education and Vocational Training (MENFOP) 
coordinates provision of appropriate curriculum in appropriate languages among the main refugee groups from 
Somalia, Eritrea, Ethiopia, and Yemen.  MENFOP has continued to prioritize refugee education during the COVID-
1922-related school closures, ensuring logistics for refugees to undertake end-of-school exams.  Another key step 
taken by the Government of Djibouti to support further education and training opportunities for refugees in the 
country was the signing of a Presidential Decree23 that helped establish the provision of the appropriate high 
school graduation certificates that allows refugee students to access higher education and vocational training 
opportunities in the country and gives them access to scholarships.   
 
B.3 
KEY CHALLENGES IN IMPROVING OUTCOMES OF SKILLS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS 
 
22. 
Vocational training is at the heart of the economic and social challenges of Djibouti.  With the new 
national vocational training policy adopted this year by the Council of Ministers, the reformed vocational training 
system is expected to achieve: (a) an increase in the number of new entrants to vocational training of at least 20 
percent, (b) a reduction in the imbalance in access between the capital and the administrative regions with most 
of the training infrastructure concentrated around Djibouti Ville, (c) significant reforms in institutional governance 
that improves coordination horizontally across public institutions, and vertically from the highest governing bodies 
to the point of service delivery, the creation and operationalization of new governance structures and modalities 
with a specific focus on improving institutional level autonomy, (d) the establishment of sustainable mechanisms 
for financing the vocational training system; and (e) integration of vocational training graduates in excess of 50 
percent into productive employment in the labor market.   
 
B.3.1 Key Challenge 1:  Improving System Level Governance 
 
23. 
The TVET Subsector in Djibouti is in the process of implementing a revised, comprehensive policy to 
help develop and grow the sub-sector.   Until recently the technical education and vocational training lacked a 
clear vision, and precise definition of the system’s role, objectives, and functioning.  In 2019, the Djiboutian 
government developed the Politique Nationale de Formation Professionelle (or the National Vocational Training 
Policy) which now provides a more comprehensive assessment of the TVET sector and the reforms that will be 
needed to improve the functioning of this subsector. However, the training policy fall short of distinguishing 
interventions and targeted activities between different social groups including youth, women, refugees, and other 
vulnerable groups. 
    
24. 
The GoD has established the Direction Générale de l’Enseignement Technique et de la Formation 
Professionnelle (DGETFP) or the General Directorate of Technical Education and Professional Training.   This was 
established in 2012 and was expected to be responsible for development and the conduct of the country’s policies 
on technical education and vocational training.  This office was restructured in 2018 and was expected to help the 
planning, budgeting, and implementing TVET programs, carry out all monitoring and evaluation functions, function 
 
22 The UNHCR and the World Bank have worked systematically to include persons of concern in the COVID-19 response efforts in a number of low- and 
middle-income countries.  The two agencies also undertook a set of telephone surveys to look at the socio-economic impacts of the COVID-19 policies 
adopted around the world and children’s mental health. 
23 This decree was signed in September 2020 and thereby expanding access to skills development opportunities for refugee populations.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 68  
     
 
as an inspectorate, and most importantly, support and ensure coordination across a range of bodies involved in 
the delivery of technical education and vocational skills.  However, it is now realized that the DGETFP, the key arm 
of the government in the technical education and vocational training space, lacks the autonomy, manpower, 
financing, and other resources needed to support such a broad set of functions.  This constrains the DGETFP’s 
ability to fulfill its objectives to support skills development and support the employability of Djibouti’s youth.  The 
fragmented training system requires an institutional architecture that is different and that can support 
coordination both vertically and horizontally through the TVET ecosystem; rope in the private sector to support 
program development and ensure that programs are relevant to the needs of the market; support a revolving 
door between industry and academia so that trainers have both practical and real world knowledge, and the 
content and pedagogical skills to impart this to the next generation of workers.  In short, the sector needs a 
strategic rethink, modernized governance structures, expansion of institutional autonomy, and numerous other 
reforms on the role of public and private stakeholders, certification, program equivalence, pathways 
development, implementable policies on the recognition of prior learning, strengthening, and diversifying the 
volume and source of funding, training of trainers, decentralization of training provision, adaptation to different 
groups – including youth, women, refugees and other vulnerable groups- and the development of quality 
assurance mechanisms.  The country’s new TVET policy recognizes these shortcomings and has clear plans to 
modernize the system and the government has exhibited a willingness to look at the reforms that will be needed. 
It falls, however, short of allowing refugees to benefit from vocational trainings.   
  
25. 
Institutional governance needs to evolve with an emphasis on institutional autonomy on all matters 
academic, administrative and to a more limited sense, financial.  The present system over-emphasizes the role 
of the ministerial department in the management and functioning of all training institutions. To improve 
efficiency of operations, institutions should be given a greater degree of autonomy in areas of administration, 
academics, and financing, and should also be supported in developing procedures for procurement, financial 
management, and auditing.  Simultaneously, the reforms should support centralized systems for quality 
assurance, promotion of program efficiency, and monitoring and evaluation of institutional outputs and 
outcomes, and support for the development of leadership, staff, and trainer skills.  
  
26. 
Successful skills development projects in Djibouti have worked across government ministries and other 
bodies.  This provides a workable template for success.  For example, Agence Française de Development’s (AFD) 
support to the transport and logistics sector has been through a tripartite arrangement which brings together 
MENFOP, Ministry of Labor, the Chamber of Commerce and the AFD.  Similarly, the US Agency for International 
Development (USAID) has worked closely with Ministère des Affaires Sociales et des Solidarités (MASS), MENFOP, 
and other private sector bodies to support their long-standing Workforce Development Program.  The Project 
design will use these lessons learned in the design of the operation.  
 
27. 
The TVET and Skills Development System in Djibouti is inflexible with medium-long term programs.  
Most TVET programs in Djibouti run a minimum of a year and for as long as three years and are modelled less to 
teach job specific skills.  They are also less likely to distinguish between different target groups including refugees. 
These programs need to be significantly reformed to make the overall skills development system more flexible, 
by converting these one year long programs into modularized, stackable short- and micro- programs which would 
support flexibility in terms of entry and exit to programs, increase access to groups who are unable to joins skills 
development programs due to the high barriers to entry, establish a skills ladder, make skills development an 
option for those who are already in the workforce, and allows for better targeting of resources.  Developing 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 68  
     
 
modularized course curricula will be a key objective of the Project and will be implemented for all priority 
programs. 
 
28. 
Quality Assurance mechanisms are not fully in place, and the elements that are in place, do not 
function as needed.   The TVET system in Djibouti would benefit from the development of the country’s quality 
assurance procedures and mechanisms.  This would involve a range of different activities from the development 
and establishment of a national vocational qualifications’ framework24  Additionally, efforts would have to be 
made to ensure that program curriculum, student assessment mechanisms, practical work, and portfolio 
development are all strengthened through the trainee’s program. 
 
29. 
Internationally Recognized, Industry Approved Certification and Portability:  The government 
recognizes the need to support internationally recognized and industry-approved certification as a way to 
increase the portability of skills.  Skills portability is critical in a country like Djibouti where the nature of the labor 
market and high levels of youth unemployment make it a critical issue.   Furthermore, since the available local 
certificates are not competence based, it is difficult for employers to select the workers they need without 
competence-based approaches to training, and which are carefully scrutinized and studied by all.  Given that such 
certificates provide a signal of both program relevance and more importantly, verifiable skills, it is expected to 
give Djiboutian youth, and other country residents such as refugees, an advantage in the labor market.  The 
portability of certificates also helps broaden the catchment area for work for Djiboutian youth making them 
competitive with youth from other countries in the labor attracting nations of the Middle East – especially the 
countries in the Gulf Cooperation Council.   In these countries, Djiboutian youth would also have the additional 
advantage of cultural similarities and an important linguistic advantage over other potential migrants from say, 
India or the Philippines.  Finally, for a relatively small country like Djibouti, access to online skills acquisition 
opportunities is expected to be a more efficient way to develop the skills of its populations rather than 
establishing in-country institutions to cover the range of skills needed to support a growing and diversifying 
economy like Djibouti.  It also allows for the use of externally developed set of standards to support skills 
development and in a range of areas, considering that skills standards will not have to be nationally developed.  
It will be more efficient in the long term given the rapid changes taking place in the demand for labor in Djibouti 
and beyond, and the significant advances being made in technology that is likely to make skills acquisition through 
such means a standard for future learners.    
    
30. 
Integration with System Partners.  There is a need to build close working partnerships between the 
training system and institutions, and representatives of the private sector, employers, chamber of commerce, and 
other relevant stakeholders including youth organization, Nongovernmental Organizations (NGOs) working 
vulnerable population as well as organizations supporting refugees’ education and training in Djibouti such as 
UNHCR and United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF).  These partnerships should be developed and strengthened 
in the coming years to ensure that the supply side for training is able to cater to the needs of local businesses, 
employers, and the private sector.  Partnerships can support the development of mandatory training programs, 
internship opportunities, and apprenticeships to support school to work transition and on the job training (OJT) 
and in general help prepare trainees for the world of work25,26.   Furthermore, such partnerships can also support 
direct training opportunities for those already in employment through Work-Based Learning (WBL) opportunities.  
 
24 Preferably a comprehensive framework that covers the entire education and training system, but which can be constructed in parts.  This will help ensure 
articulation across levels. 
25 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.NET.USER.ZS?locations=SZ 
26 Labour Force Survey, 2016. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 68  
     
 
In addition, it is critical that the supply side for training actively explore and initiate programs directly with 
employers and workers.  This outreach is typically lacking in most institutional settings and must be a key 
component of the work plans of any training provider.  This will be the main thrust of the first component of the 
Project. 
 
B.3.2 Key Challenge 2:  Ensuring Broad-Based Access to Skills Development Programs 
 
31. 
Access to post-basic training remains severely curtailed.   Despite the number of institutions, training 
opportunities relative to needs are few in the context of Djibouti.  Furthermore, most training programs are set 
up for those who complete at least compulsory schooling before entering the formal system for further training 
and seem to be geared for the few employment opportunities that emerge in the formal sector, even while 
recognizing that most jobs remain firmly embedded in the informal sector.  There are very limited opportunities 
for those who drop-out of school early or for those who never went to school, and instead have entered the 
workforce directly and function in the informal sector.  However, even with this relatively high barrier to entry, 
vocational programs are considered inferior and have a negative stigma associated with them and tend to be 
viewed as an option only for the underprivileged and not others.  Thus, while a sizeable share of the population 
does not have the opportunity to acquire more training even if they wished to do so, there is another group who 
chose not to do so even when they are able to access these programs.  It is critical that the reforms undertaken 
by the government help ensure that those who do not meet the high barriers to entry but are most likely to work 
in these areas are given opportunities by creating pathways and ladders to gain entry and broaden the set of 
requirements of access by supporting programs that can validate acquired experience or through recognition of 
prior learning programs.  While there are really no apparent systemic barriers within the training sector that 
prevents women from participating in technical education and vocational training programs, the number of 
women in non-traditional programs and courses continues to be small.  The USAID’s Workforce Development 
program’s Gender Assessment reveals that a combination of prevalent social norms, parental influence, and poor 
communications, impacts decisions by women to participate in these programs. The assessment also highlights 
financial barriers for women to access to TVET (to cover the cost of courses including equipment as well as the 
cost of transportation), supply-side barriers (discrimination and harassment during trainings, few female trainers 
playing as role models, lack of targeted trainings to female needs/interests due to their limited participation in 
decision-making, etc.). These issues will need to be addressed to help improve system equity in terms of gender.  
Notwithstanding these concerns, it does need to be acknowledged that the official statistics suggest that nearly 
41 percent of students in the TVET sector are women, suggesting that the sheer lack of opportunities and access 
in other programs (such as, higher education) does result in a significant number of women accessing these 
programs.  Nevertheless, it is important and critical to support not only the expansion of opportunities for more 
women, but also to increase the range of opportunities thereby incentivizing women and young girls to access 
training in non-traditional programs. 
 
32. 
  The government is committed to ensuring access to quality education for all students considered as 
vulnerable, which include girls from host communities, refugees, and children with special needs.  Girls’ 
enrollment is lower at all education levels and makes up 49 percent of preschool, 46 percent of primary, and 45 
percent of lower secondary school students27,28.   Girls’ participation rates across levels are lower even though 
girls’ do better in school, i.e., have lower repetition rates at primary level and their scores on the national primary 
 
27 World Bank (2019) Djibouti Expanding Opportunities for Learning Project. 
28 The estimates of the share of girls and women in technical and professional education are several, and some place this as high as 41 percent.  The Education 
Plan similarly estimates that nearly 50 percent of all trainees will be women.   
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 68  
     
 
school examination are slightly better than boys.  Notwithstanding these facts, girls still experience a higher 
dropout rate in the fifth grade, and which partially accounts for the disparities in enrollment in lower secondary.  
Also, only 38 percent of women report having completed at least primary education compared to about 57 
percent of the men.  Nearly 46 percent of girls are estimated to be out of school compared to about 39 percent 
of boys.  There are also significant differences in primary school enrollment with only about 60 percent of girls 
enrolled compared to about 69 percent of boys, even while the gender gap in literacy rates for cohorts born 
between the mid-50s and mid-70s was around 24 percentage points and has now narrowed to about 2 percentage 
points for cohorts between the ages of 10-14 years. According to the initial results of a survey of out of school 
children in 2019, the average percentage of out-of-school girls in lower secondary is 18 percent while it stands at 
13 percent for boys. The lower rates of enrollment for girls at the lower secondary level are particularly prevalent 
in rural areas of the country, with the average percentage of out-of-school girls in rural areas at the lower 
secondary level being 47 percent compared to 31 percent for boys. The top two reasons listed for the non-
schooling of girls according to this study are: (a) their lack of interest; and (b) their parents’ refusal to send them 
to school because they are girls. Therefore, renewed, and targeted efforts are needed to be undertaken to reach 
gender parity especially in lower secondary. 
 
33. 
Djibouti has put into place policies and strategies to narrow the gender gap in education.  Elimination 
of the gender disparity in education is a key priority for the country which aims to produce future leaders, 
teachers, and lawmakers as part of the country’s efforts to fight for the equal rights for all citizens. This is a critical 
goal and perhaps most important from the viewpoint of improving girls’ education in Djibouti. There are 
numerous partners supporting this transformation in the country.  The country has partnered with organizations 
like UNICEF to support the expansion of access to educational opportunities for girls through programs such as 
the Gender Equality and Basic Education program; and with WFP which supported school meals programs and 
included special provisions for girls who attended at least 21 days of school per month such as can of cooking oil 
to take home29.  Numerous other partners have also emphasized the importance of expanding access for girls in 
the education and training areas.30   
   
34. 
The country has also put into place programs to support educational development for refugee children.  
The GoD signed the “Djibouti Declaration on the Education of Refugees in Intergovernmental Authority on 
Development Member States” on December 14, 2017.  Thereby affirming its responsibility for the education of all 
school-age children within its borders. In line with this, MENFOP is currently taking over the operation of all 
refugee village/camp schools and is working to develop long-term sustainable education services for refugee 
children in Djibouti. MENFOP has developed a roadmap for this transition which is regularly followed up by senior 
officials of the ministry.  MENFOP has been keeping track of refugee related data since 2017/18 and include these 
in their annual educational statistical tables. A recent out of school children (OOSC) survey 2019, estimates that 
about 42 percent of 6-10-year-old refugees and 40 percent of 11-14-year-old refugees are enrolled in schools 
nationally. Rural regions, which are home to over 80 percent of all refugees, are home to about large out of school 
populations amounting to 44 percent of 6-10-year-olds and 38.7 percent of 11-14-year-olds.  MENFOP also 
support language specific interventions for refugee populations to support the large number of Somali, Yemeni 
and other sub-population needs in these settings.  The proposed operation will also focus on support to youth 
members of the refugee population both in terms of training and access to job opportunities.  There are three 
 
29 https://www.borgenmagazine.com/education-in-djibouti/ 
30 The Project had initially envisaged the use of differentiated training costs to incentivize training providers to target the most disadvantaged groups and 
increase their access to training opportunities.  This approach, which has been used successfully in other similar projects, but the lack of a reliable set of 
estimates on area and location specific unit costs makes the use of this approach impossible.  A key project objective will be to establish unit costs by the 
Project mid-term for programs in these priority areas. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 68  
     
 
refugee preschools that serve a total of 686 students, and three primary refugee schools and five accelerated 
learning centers that serve 3,529 students. At the lower secondary level, there are 743 refugee students enrolled 
in three schools31.  Finally, the skills need among refugees might be significantly different from those belonging to 
the host country, and therefore care must be taken when designing programs that support refugee populations 
in countries like Djibouti, where TVET systems have experienced limited growth, there will be a need to develop 
a balanced approach to competing needs. 
 
35. 
MENFOP is committed to accommodating special needs students at school. Stigma continues to be 
attached to various disabilities in Djibouti. To address this, MENFOP has set up an Office for Special Needs, has a 
basic strategy, and classes for visually- and hearing-impaired students at the primary level. In 2017-18, the first 
cohort of hearing-impaired students graduated from a specialized TVET program. MENFOP has set targets in their 
Education Sector Plan (Plan d’Action de l’Education – PAE 2017-20) of enrolling 600 students in the next three 
years, which presents significant challenges due to the overall constraints within MENFOP. A costed plan would 
allow for a harmonized approach and mobilization of the necessary resources to ensure sustainability of these 
kinds of initiatives.   Given the low levels of formal sector opportunities in the country, labor migration in the 
region should be viewed as possible alternative solutions to job-creation within the country.  Unfortunately, the 
systems are not yet in place to support a structured labor migration and mobility program in the country, and all 
efforts currently in place are ad hoc in nature, for example, engaging with the diaspora for engagement in Djibouti 
and the development of a Diaspora Strategy, and the support for 50 Djiboutian migrant workers in food processing 
in Canada.  Various ministries are engaged with these efforts, though the Project will work with the Ministry of 
Labor and Administrative Reform to support the advance of structured labor mobility programs. 
 
B.3.3. 
Key Challenge 3:  Institutional Governance Focusing on Financing, Physical and Human Resources 
  
36. 
Education budget allocations are mostly used to cover recurrent salary expenditures, crowding out 
capital expenditures on infrastructure, professional development, and education innovation. In 2018, the 
education budget stood at US$130 million, of which 45.1 percent was allotted to primary education (grades 1-6).  
Education spending represented 19 percent of the national budget. In 2016, investment spending as a percentage 
of the total national investment spending stood at 6 percent while recurrent spending in education as a 
percentage of overall recurrent national spending stood at 17.3 percent. Salaries, transfers, and subsidies 
accounted for 93.4 percent of recurrent education expenditures in 2016. 
 
37. 
The TVET system is poorly financed and resourced.  Although allocations to the TVET sector have 
increased in recent years, through the establishment of a Special Fund for the development of the TVET sector, 
routine budgetary allocation to the department for the functioning of the institutions, and from external sources 
through development partner cooperation, the new strategy still identifies funding as a key constraint.  This will 
continue to thwart the development and quality of the training sector unless this is addressed.  While TVET may 
be underfunded in Djibouti, there is also a need to recognize that steps need to be taken to improve the efficiency 
of use of available resources.  A clear mapping of the use of available financing, its allocative and productive 
efficiencies, and the outcomes it is able to buy, would need to clearly understand to strengthen the overall system.  
It would be important to improve the use of data in decision making in this sector, conduct efficiency studies 
across a range of providers to better understand how resources are allocated and used across different activities 
within the TVET sector.  Furthermore, Djibouti should consider alternative mechanisms to raise financing for TVET, 
 
31 These numbers have been obtained from the Expanding Opportunities for Learning Project (P166059) and pre-date COVID.  These numbers will be 
updated regularly as part of the Project.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 68  
     
 
such as, a levy on private sector participants, an expat levy, and perhaps training levies targeted at the transport 
and logistics sector – the main stay of the Djiboutian economy.  Furthermore, there is very little understanding of 
the unit costs for training and therefore no way to plan the expansion and contraction of programs, the costs 
needed to support a quality assured program, the level of support needed for the basic package of teaching and 
learning materials and associated expenditures.   
   
38. 
The Role of Information and Communications Technology (ICTs) and other related technologies in 
training system.  The pandemic has laid bare the incredible divide between those students who have access to 
broadband connectivity and associated devices, and those that do not have such access.  This provides the 
necessary impetus to build system resilience, and build back better, in order to ensure that over the medium 
term, Djibouti’s TVET system is able to cope with future shocks without having to shut down.  Even though online 
learning is not ideal and as many teachers and trainers have stated, there is perceptible weaknesses in transacting 
classroom activity through this medium, events of the last year have illustrated the need for system resiliency.  
TVET is particularly impacted by this pandemic given the significant share of practical work that requires face to 
face transactions and elevates the risk of transmission of the virus. The physical constrains and lack of access to 
internet in remote areas such refuges hosting villages of Ali-Addeh and Holl-Holl are impeding provision of ICT 
related training.  MENFOP’s ICT strategy already has in place a ‘one child, one tablet’ policy initiated by the 
country’s President but lack behind in remote areas.  Expanding digital connectivity, adopting open-source 
software, increased use of audio-visuals in classroom transactions, and gradual shift towards augmented reality 
and virtual reality (AR/VR) devices for simulating practical environments for training could help build resiliency 
for future emergencies. 
    
39. 
The professional development system for trainers in Djibouti is weak and consists only of initial training:  
The most important element in any training system is the set of trainers who will train the next generation of 
workers.  The quality of trainers represents that vast chasm between program success and program failure.  The 
current stock of trainers in the Djiboutian system have not been adequately trained in recent years neither at pre-
service stage nor through in-service training.  There are very few programs available for the continuing training 
for trainers in Djibouti and given the length of time some of them have been trainers, they have little 
understanding of current skills needs in the productive sectors.  The system needs to increase the cross-
fertilization between industry and the training sector, so that trainers can make their programs more relevant and 
without the constant rebuilding of skills through participation in industry settings, many training programs would 
become outdated and obsolete.  Improving efforts to establish systemic changes to finance the training of trainers 
would be important.  Furthermore, strengthening partnerships between industry and training providers would 
support the development of market relevant training programs.  The sector also needs to become less centralized, 
so that decisions on training can be taken at the institution level and does not require MENFOP’s clearance.   The 
Project will contribute to addressing these challenges by supporting the development of programs oriented 
towards outcomes, and the use of Competency Based Assessments will strengthen pedagogical practices of the 
trainers. The process for curriculum development will include a job analysis to describe duties and tasks and 
validation by industry representatives on the agreed set of competency standards as well as the drafting of the 
curriculum. 
 
B.4 
THE PRIORITY ECONOMIC SECTORS IN DJIBOUTI 
 
40. 
The priority economic sectors include the following:  Transport and Logistics, Construction and Related 
Trades, Foundational ICT Skills, Energy and Selected Services; Tourism and Hospitality, Creative Industries, Nursing 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 68  
     
 
and Midwifery, and Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries Sectors.   This note identifies the likely number of trainees 
every year to receive skills development support in these sectors.  The total number of beneficiaries per year who 
receive training support amounts to about 1800 individuals per year and will comprise of both nationals and 
refugees.   These are summarized in the paras below. 
 
41. 
Transport and Logistics: There are a range of jobs that exist within the transport and logistics sectors of 
the economy.  Given the huge importance of the Djibouti Port – these would include marine and port operations, 
stevedores, traffic service operations, port managers, marine pilots, harbor masters, and engineers.   Beyond 
these are a range of other possibilities include forklift drivers, truckers, maintenance staff, custodial staff, cooks, 
carpenters, etc.  Based on assessments with clients, employers, government officials, Chamber of Commerce, and 
in comparison, with similar sectors in other countries– it is anticipated that the Transport and Logistics sector 
should account for about 1,500-6,500 workers in various capacities.  This would also be based on how quickly 
economic growth and global trade rebound in the post-COVID-19 period given the significant disruption in supply 
chains, shipping, berthing, and unloading delays that is being witnessed now.  The Project anticipates an annual 
throughput of about 75-120 new trainees every year across all target groups. 
 
42. 
Construction and Related Trades:   The construction sector is a labor absorbing sector and one in which 
there are clear demands for skills.   The construction sector is expected to absorb between 2500 and 3000 workers.  
Not all of these would be salaried workers but would include those who are self-employed.  The Djibouti 
construction market is more of a Do-It-Yourself (DIY) market than what is found in more traditional labor markets 
in construction sectors elsewhere.  However, given the huge demand for urban development, this vision of a DIY 
market is still expected to support needed skills across urban Djibouti and even in more difficult to reach areas.  
The Project anticipates an annual throughput of about 375 new trainees to prepare potential candidates for 
upcoming construction work.  With the economy positioned to regain momentum in the near future, the 
construction sector is expected to employ a high number of workers across all target groups, with the Project 
helping the country prepare for the adequate supply of skilled labor. 
 
43. 
Foundational ICT Skills:  The Project will support the development of core or foundational digital skills in 
the workplace.  This will be done through regular TVET institutions, specialized TVET institutions and through the 
use of training institutions in the private sector which meet the requirements to register as training organizations 
with the MENFOP.  Foundational digital skills allow the learner to significantly expand their knowledge base and 
is critical given the fact that most jobs of the future will require some level of digital skills.  The program would 
provide the learner with the skills needed to be work safely and legally while online, work with a range of 
applications including email services, conferencing, and group work applications, understand the usefulness of 
social media to improve outcomes, engage in business, advertisement, etc., and the use of computers for office 
work, computing, and other similar tasks. The Project will also support higher order computer skills under the 
same umbrella for a select set of trainees.  The Project anticipates that upwards of 750 trainees can benefit from 
such programs in Djibouti every year across all groups targeted for support under this Project.   
 
44. 
Energy and Related Services:  The energy and renewable energy sectors are a growing sector worldwide.  
Nearly 11.5 million individuals participated in the renewable energy sector, with many more millions participating 
in the non-renewable energy sector globally.  Djibouti is punching above its weight on the renewable side – 
through solar energy, geothermal opportunities, and wind power.  It is also a sector that absorbs a high proportion 
of women workers with the global workforce share of women amounting to about 32 percent. Based on 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 68  
     
 
preliminary assessments, Djibouti should have the capacity to absorb about 1200 workers in this sector.  The 
Project aims to support about 225 trainees in this sector over the span of the Project. 
 
45. 
Tourism and the Hospitality Sector:   Tourism is one of the eight priority economic sectors identified for 
support under the proposed Project.  While the COVID-19 pandemic has had a far-reaching and unfortunate 
impacts on global tourism – both leisure and business, there is an assumption that tourism will rebound in the 
coming years in Djibouti which receives more business tourists than leisure travelers.  Globally, experts believe 
that leisure travel will be back to pre-pandemic levels in early 2022, with business travel lagging a few years 
behind.  In Djibouti, it is expected that the business tourists will dominate tourist inflows in the coming years.  Just 
before the pandemic hit in March 2020, the GoD had worked with the International Organization for Migration 
(IOM) to develop an E-Visa system to facilitate travel to the country and supported the development of the 
tourism sector, and are now hoping that such measures, plus low overall COVID rates would help revive business 
tourism in their strategically located country.  The construction of new hotels in Djibouti City will add significantly 
to the demand for skills in Djibouti and the Project aims to support the needs of this sector through relevant 
training.  It is expected to be a demand of about 1,200 individuals in this sector during implementation. 
 
46. 
Creative Industries:  This sector has been added to cater to the youth of Djibouti who fancy opportunities 
in the creative sectors of the economy.  While there is latent evidence of this as a growing sector, these are not 
adequately captured in national data.   However, there is significant evidence to suggest that investing in skills 
that support jobs in the creative industries would prove attractive to a range of youth, typically the more educated 
and skilled youth in the country who would not wish to engage in work of a manual or menial nature.  Creative 
industries are a very broad term and covers a range of potential work areas including advertising and marketing; 
architecture; art and design – both the traditional variety and in the graphics and digital space; crafts and artisanry; 
fashion design; TV, radio, media, movies, and film; journalism; writing; and music.  Not all areas will be selected 
but some of these will be identified by the government in consultation with sectoral and development partners 
to determine areas to support.  It is expected that upwards of 50 trainees per year can be supported in these 
sectors by the project. 
 
47. 
Nursing and midwifery:  Djibouti ranks in the bottom quarter of countries in terms of maternal mortality 
rates.  The maternal mortality rate in Djibouti is 248 deaths per 100,000 live births.  A significant share of these 
deaths, 22 percent, can be attributed directly to the widespread practice of FGM/C in Djibouti32, especially since 
the worse forms of FGM/C are prevalent in the country33.  Furthermore, Djibouti has a serious shortage of 
reproductive and maternal health care workers.  At present, Djibouti has about 7 workers per 10,000 who engage 
in work in this sector, and this is even below the African average of 12.4 per 10,000. Lack of medical professional 
and community worker is more pronounced in rural areas.  The Project will work closely with relevant stakeholders 
to strengthen training for midwives, nurse attendants and community health workers in Djibouti city but also in 
the regions including refugees hosting areas of Ali-Addeh, Holl-Holl and Obock.  The Project anticipates training 
about 50 individuals per year in this critical area and aims to support insertion into the workforce.  
 
 
32 A WHO study showed that women who have been subjected to FGM/C face higher risk of dangerous and complicated childbirth. In the case of a type III 
FGM/C (the most common type practiced in Djibouti), the risk of hemorrhage after birth is 70 percent higher, cesarean section is 30 percent higher, and 
extended hospital stay are 98 percent higher than for those who have not undergone any mutilation. 
https://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/fgm/fgm-obstetric-study-en.pdf https://news.un.org/fr/story/2006/06/93232 
33 Also known as FGM Type 3 or infibulation (this is the narrowing of the vaginal opening through the creation of a covering seal. The seal is formed by 
cutting and repositioning the labia minora, or labia majora, sometimes through stitching, with or without removal of the clitoral prepuce/clitoral hood and glans. 
- WHO, 2021). 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 68  
     
 
48. 
Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries:   While Djibouti has only limited potential in the area of agriculture, 
there are significant opportunities to support livestock and fisheries. In fishing, the Government is aiming to tap 
into the skilled Yemeni refugees based in Obock to train local Djiboutians and attract workers in this sector, 
providing good twinning and entrepreneurial opportunities. There are currently very little numbers and sensible 
standards that can be used to determine the approximate number of trainees across these areas.   However, the 
government has committed to developing a feasibility study for this sector and about 200 trainees will be 
supported over the project implementation period. 
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
49. 
The proposed Project is fully aligned with the WBG’s Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) 2018 
suggesting a multi-pronged approach required to support reforms in education.  It is evident that sweeping, 
deep, and sustained reforms will be needed to improve outcomes for trainees both in terms of learning and labor 
market outcomes, both in the informal and formal sectors.  In addition to the SCD, the proposed Project is fully 
aligned with the WBG’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY21-26 (Report No. 147787-DJ), where Focus 
Area 1 emphasizes “support human capital, inclusive and private sector-led growth and job-creation and economic 
transformation by fostering private investment and entrepreneurship” and Focus Area 2 emphasizes “…strengthen 
the role and capacity of the state to deliver service, promote inclusion and modernize public institutions”.  The 
project is also fully aligned with the MENA regional strategy which aims to support jobs and transformation and 
advance gender equity. 
 
50. 
The proposed Project is fully aligned with the objectives enshrined in the Djibouti National TVET 
Strategy and will focus on supporting and strengthening job market outcomes for Djiboutian youth.  This will be 
in both the informal and formal sectors through improving the quality of the provision of TVET programs in 
Djibouti.  This will strengthen the country’s human capital and while simultaneously helping to establish training 
corridors which are deeply connected to the labor market. The proposed Project will directly contribute to the 
WBG’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity by investing in training and work 
force development activities that would support Djibouti’s objectives of strengthening its human capital through 
training for all categories of groups.

A. Project Development Objective 
 
PDO Statement 
 
51. 
To improve employability and employment outcomes of technical and vocational education and training 
graduates with a focus on women, persons with disabilities and refugees in priority economic sectors. 
 
PDO Level Indicators 
 
52. 
The Key Results include the following indicators: 
 Increased enrollment in priority TVET sectors (disaggregated by gender, refugees, and persons with 
disabilities). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 68  
     
 
 Share of girls/women, refugees, persons with disabilities completing TVET programs increased. 
 Share of trainees employed 6 and 9 months after completion of their programs in relevant sectors 
(disaggregated by gender, refugees, and persons with disabilities). 
 
B. Project Components 
 
Description 
 
53. 
The proposed Project will help develop a responsive skills development sector to address current and 
emerging labor market needs, while simultaneously contributing to the establishment of systems to support the 
long-term growth of the training sector.  Given that formal job growth in Djibouti is very low, the Project will 
emphasize employability and employment outcomes in both the informal and formal sectors, as well as in the 
private and public sectors of the economy.  As skills development programs do not create jobs, the Project will 
help improve employment outcomes in three ways – (a) improve program relevance with access to internships, 
apprenticeship programs, OJT and WBL opportunities directly with the public and private sectors, (b) support 
development of skills for new economic areas by expanding the set of priority sector, and (c) increase the pool of 
jobs by identifying online job opportunities and opportunities for migrant workers outside of Djibouti.  The Project 
will strengthen the quality and relevance of skills development programs in Djibouti in these priority sectors and 
help develop more flexible training systems. All training providers, public, private, foundations, and non-
government entities will be eligible to benefit from this Project conditional upon agreeing to undertake specific 
reforms.  Djibouti’s youth34 will be the primary targets for support with the specific aim of increasing access for 
girls/women, persons with disabilities, and refugees. In line with national engagement of integration of refugees 
into country systems, the Project will establish mechanism to allow refugees to benefit of training programs 
alongside nationals and support access to employment opportunities. Interventions and policy actions will be 
based on the national TVET policy. 
 
54. 
 Five cross cutting themes will underpin all Project activities: 
a) inclusion for all – with a specific emphasis on improving opportunities for women, differently-abled 
individuals, and refugees; 
b) data driven decision making – Project decisions will be based on data, and the Project will support 
low-cost and appropriate data collection procedures to be applied across the sector; 
c) building back better – to ensure that the system is resilient to unanticipated shocks and can continue 
to function in the aftermath of such shocks; 
d) critical skills - life skills, foundation skills35 and employability training will be required of all graduates 
of these programs; and 
e) greening of the TVET sector - focusing on the development of a green sector through the building of 
green infrastructure, acquisition of equipment and resources which minimize the environmental 
footprint, support training in sectors which emphasize sustainability such as green energy, climate 
resilient farming, etc. 
 
 
34 Although not formally defined or enshrined in the government documents, the du jour definition in Djibouti of youth includes those between the ages of 
15-24 years.  However, for the purposes of this Project, the definition of youth will be expanded to include all individuals between 15-35 years of age, and 
this is the age range used by the Government for training purposes.   
35  Such as language and socio emotional skills. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 68  
     
 
55. 
The Project will be anchored on two (2) components which link training to actual opportunities in the 
market to improve employment outcomes, help set up the enabling environment for increased employment 
outcomes, support institution level reforms to improve the quality, relevance, and effectiveness of service 
delivery. These are detailed in the following paragraphs. 
 
COMPONENT 1:  DIRECT TRAINING (TOTAL US$5.70 MILLION, IDA US$5.70 MILLION) 
 
56. 
This component will support the immediate training needs in the country through the following: (a) 
internships, apprenticeships, on the job training, and work-based learning opportunities; (b) online acquisition of 
skills and jobs through existing skills and online job platforms, and (c) expanding job opportunities through labor 
mobility programs.   All decision making for Component 1 will be delegated to the Economic Development 
Council/Conseil de Développement Économique (CDE), while MENFOP will remain as the implementing agency and 
the Ministry of Labor as grant co-agent.  The results framework provides the number of women, persons with 
disabilities, and refugees supported under each sub-component. 
 
57. 
Sub-Component 1.1: Improving Employability and Employment Outcomes through Work Based 
Programs: This sub-component will finance school to work transition opportunities to support trainee insertion 
into the world of work through internships, apprenticeships, OJT and WBL opportunities.   The Project will support 
a workforce training grant that will competitively award grants to a range of employers in selected economic 
sectors to help meet the skills needs in these organizations. The grants will be used for training both existing and 
new employees, including from the key disadvantaged groups.  While the details of the functioning of this Grant 
window will be developed in the Project Operations Manual (POM) some criteria for selection are likely to include 
inter alia: (a) years in operation with greater points awarded to employers who have been in existence for a longer 
period of time; (b) training duration limited to two or three months per training module, (c) training that favors 
employment-growth36, and (d) willingness to take on trainees from disadvantaged groups including women, 
persons with disabilities and refugees. Grant seekers will be invited on a quarterly basis for direct placement 
opportunities in industries, work environments, contractor agencies, etc. and for mentored training through OJT 
scholarships and Work Based Learning.  Trainees will be assessed after the period of training to determine the 
acquisition of specific skills.  Payments to these work environments will be staggered to ensure that trainees skills 
are developed, with final payments made after post-training skills are assessed.  Given that the training levels are 
expected to vary extensively across training needs37 the sub-component will also finance the development of (a) 
necessary guidelines and implementation modules for technical, financial, business-development, and managerial 
support training needed for labor market success and training materials and equipment within a certain threshold; 
(b) training grants of different sizes to cover the differing training needs; (c) quality assurance measures, 
procedures and audits. Selection criteria for training programs and candidates promoting objectiveness, 
inclusiveness and transparency will be established.   
 
58. 
Sub-Component 1.2:  Online Acquisition of Skills and Jobs through Scholarships Reimbursement and 
Incentive Payments:  This sub-component will finance access to innovative learning and work opportunities for 
Djiboutian and refugees' youth through established online international training platforms including inter alia 
Coursera, EdX, Cisco Learning Network Store, etc., online job-platforms, including inter alia, Freelancer, Upwork, 
 
36  For example, based on the ratio of existing to new staff with employers with a smaller ratio of these indicators receiving more consideration,   
37 For example, from the requirements of local Banks to the need for semi-skilled labor in the construction sector. The pool of individuals from which the 
selection will take place will be large and could include those who have successfully completed the equivalent of a school leaving certificate program, those 
transitioning from school or university, and those already in the workplace in companies and industries in priority economic sectors. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 68  
     
 
Guru, Workana, etc., and efforts to develop online entrepreneurs.  One concern with this approach is that it is 
expected to increase the skills gaps across the income spectrum of households in Djibouti, with trainees from 
higher income households having a higher likelihood of participation and completion, and thereby exacerbating 
the allocation of skills across households.  This is also likely given that the technical and knowledge pre-requisites 
for such innovative and self-directed learning will be high and is expected to favor households at the higher end 
of the income spectrum.  Notwithstanding this concern, it will be a significant means of building skills in Djibouti, 
helping to increase access and develop resiliency in training systems.  The specific modalities needed to support 
this component, will be detailed in the POM. 
 
 
Innovative, Self-Directed Learning:   A select set of in-demand certificates will be identified by the Project 
Steering Committee and these programs will be listed on relevant websites.  These programs will be 
accessible to all youth in the country, and specific efforts will be made to recruit candidates from the most 
disadvantaged sub-groups such as women, refugees, and persons with disabilities.  All candidates who 
wish to undertake one or more of these courses would be required to register for the course of their 
choice and complete one or more of these programs and obtain an internationally- and industry-
recognized certificate associated with these programs.  Successful graduates will be eligible for full 
reimbursement of program costs upon presentation of the acquired certification.   This puts in place the 
right incentives for the acquisition of such skills and ensures scarce government resources are used most 
efficiently38.  The emphasis on internationally recognized and/or industry-certification allows recipients 
to have the desired portability of skills needed by employers and the labor market.  It also expands the 
geographic coverage over which these skills could be deployed allowing Djiboutian youth and members 
of the refugees’ population access to neighborhood labor markets that they have not been able to tap 
into before in significant numbers particularly in the culturally and in some cases linguistically similar 
countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council. 
 
 
Online Gig Workers:  The sub-component will support access to online job platforms such as Freelancer, 
Upwork, Guru and Workana.  This opportunity to work in the Gig Economy is a growing trend in Africa 
with a recent survey showing that nearly 1.3 percent of adult Africans earn money through such work 
opportunities.  The specific platform to be selected will be decided by the Project Steering Committee.  
Detailed guidelines will be developed to support this initiative, including support for connectivity and 
device access as needed.  The initial cohort will focus on providing opportunities for a total of 100 
individuals, of which 50 will be women, selected based on their skills, aptitudes, and familiarity with digital 
technologies.  These candidates will be trained on how to access opportunities in the online marketplace, 
how to establish and highlight their specific skills set, and join the community of online Gig Workers.  Given 
the limited access to devices and broadband connectivity in the country, the Project will partner with 
existing IT training providers to provide access to these candidates and in situ support as needed, to get 
them started on these platforms.  Given the global evidence on why youth are less likely to be employed, 
the Project will support workers gain a foothold in the online labor market and help increase the likelihood 
of being hired competitively through this initial opportunity to demonstrate their skills and abilities.  
Women, persons with disabilities, and refugees who successfully compete in this market and earn USD 
2000 in compensation, will be eligible to receive a matching allocation from the Project as a way to secure 
the purchase of a personal device and connectivity access.  The specific modalities that will be put into 
 
38 Online skills acquisition programs while potentially useful are not without problems.  Student and trainee motivation is key to online success and existing 
evidence from Massive Open Online Courses illustrates that completion rates can be as low as 10 percent.  The process of reimbursement helps ensure that 
scarce government resources are not wasted on subsidizing those who fail to complete the online programs but reward students who complete successfully.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 68  
     
 
place for this sub-component, will be detailed in the POM. 
 
 
Online Entrepreneurs:  As Djibouti’s digital infrastructure grows, online trading and e-commerce is 
expected to grow and become increasingly popular whereby a greater share of Djiboutians will buy and 
sell services and goods through online systems and platforms.  Support for the development of such online 
entrepreneurs will require knowledge and skills needed for business establishment and development and 
develop an organizational structure and environment for such work and be fully aware of the challenges 
and risks involved in such efforts.  This component will support the development and access to learning 
modules and tools to support skills needed to succeed as online entrepreneurs and these will focus on a 
range of factors such as convenience for the customer, business created through government support, 
online networking and partnerships, reliability as a supplier of products and services, etc.  For a select 
number of candidates, the project will consider supporting access to seed resources.  
 
59. 
Sub-Component 1.3:  Developing Labor Mobility Options for Djibouti:  Given that job creation in Djibouti 
is slow, this sub-component supports both Djiboutian nationals and members of the refugee population in 
Djibouti, with opportunities to access overseas labor markets.   The sub-component will finance the development 
of guidelines and the establishment of partnerships with neighboring Gulf Cooperation Council countries and 
others, to accommodate and accept a minimum of 250 Djiboutian and refugee workers annually in these 
countries39.  The sub-component will finance (a) capacity building at the MENFOP, MT, Djibouti Chamber of 
Commerce (COC), the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and other similar commercial and professional bodies, (b) 
provide technical assistance to the GoD to put in place plans to develop and establish Bilateral Labor Agreements 
(BLAs), (c) finance life-skills, language and IT Literacy training for potential migrants pre-departure, and (d) 
reimburse preparation and travel costs associated with first time migrant workers limited to the acquisition of 
passports and other travel-related expenses up to the lowest category of air-travel.  The Project will also work 
closely with partner agencies including GIZ, SDC and others who are recognized world leaders in supporting 
programs of this nature.  As noted in Para 13, IGAD member states are looking to develop mechanisms to support 
a regional system on labor mobility within and between member states and this component will coordinate closely 
with IGAD to ensure compliance with this framework. 
 
60. 
While ‘inclusion for all’ is a key objective of this Project this will need to be carefully choreographed and 
planned.  The Project aims to support three key groups – women, differently-abled individuals, and refugees.  In 
Djibouti, existing social norms, traditional harmful practices (FGMC/C and child marriage), the role played by 
parents, the lack of a communications strategy, and financial barriers impacts decisions by women to participate 
in TVET and skills development programs in Djibouti.  There are range of other concerns as well, such as, 
discrimination and harassment during trainings, female trainers as role models, and lack of targeted trainings to 
female needs/interests due to their limited participation in decision-making.   Effective policy options will need to 
include those that can address some or all of these factors including expansion of the supply of training, building 
networks to support transition from training to work, and a targeted communications and media strategy. A 
similar set of issues need to be addressed with regards to integrating persons with disabilities into training and 
employment programs including the lack of data and information on the number and type of disabilities, 
accessibility of the training system, lack of access to the world of work, inherent biases, etc.  The Project will need 
to put in place measures to address these issues during implementation and the Project will support a strong 
 
39  This will complement work already being undertaken by the GoD to support investments in the country by offering potential investors a streamlined, 
single window approach to accessing Djibouti and its markets – for example, by making it possible for expatriates to obtain e-Visas to enter the country and 
by making it easier for the Djiboutian diaspora to access their origin country more readily. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 68  
     
 
communications strategy.  Finally, to ensure the inclusion of representatives of the refugee populations and to 
help them integrate into the labor markets in host communities, a number of issues need to be addressed during 
implementation with the most important ones focusing on incomplete and overlapping legal frameworks, lack of 
information on refugee status and skills, failure to recognize skills in host country, segregated education and 
training systems, stigma and bias, and lack of connections to professional networks and the world of work.  The 
Project will address a number of these issues during implementation through incentives, over-sampling of the 
refugee population, supporting efforts to recognize and certify skills within the refugee population through well-
defined RPL mechanisms in priority economic sectors and through a coherent communications strategy.  
 
COMPONENT 2: IMPROVING TVET SECTORAL AND INSTITUTIONAL GOVERNANCE, ARCHITECTURE AND SERVICE 
DELIVERY MECHANISMS AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT (TOTAL US$9.30 MILLION, IDA US$9.30 MILLION) 
 
61. 
Component 2 strengthens the existing skills development architecture in Djibouti.  It does this through a 
minimalist, bottom-up approach.  This will be implemented through two sub-components.   in which the first sub-
component will modernize and operationalize TVET governance in Djibouti, in line with the country’s national 
strategy for TVET development, and to ensure that training programs are relevant and aligned with labor market 
needs.  The second sub-component supports putting in place Quality Improvement Packages and associated 
investments to strengthen training provision in the country.  The final sub-component supports all aspects of 
project implementation – including financial management, procurement, and environmental and social 
safeguards. 
 
62. 
Sub-Component 2.1: Modernizing Education and Skills Governance:  The revised TVET policy includes a 
number of reforms aimed at improving coordination within and across ministries, the private sector, and other 
participants in the skills development ecosystem, including the insertion of the refugees in the TVET policy and 
strategic documents. The Project will help design structures to support an all of government approach to skills 
and jobs.   There are three parts to this sub-component:  
 
 Knowledge base for TVET governance:  A key element of this design would be to support the 
establishment of an independent authority for TVET and skills development.  The sub-component will 
finance a White Paper to develop the procedures, regulations, and guidelines needed to improve sector 
coordination horizontally across government ministries40, with the private and business sectors41, and 
support vertical integration through the skills development chain to the point of service delivery42.   
Specifically, the sub-component will finance: (a) knowledge products on TVET sector governance, (b) 
knowledge tours to relevant comparator to better understand how skills development activities are 
governed43, and (c) the development of a White Paper supporting the establishment of an independent 
TVET body. 
 
 Sector Working Groups (SWGs):  These ad hoc committees, comprised of public and private sector actors, 
will help revise and modernize existing curricula, training, and assessment guides.  The key task will fall 
 
40 For example, revisions to agriculture training courses cannot be undertaken without the participation of the Ministry of Agriculture, and other similar 
coordination failures currently common in the Djiboutian training landscape.  
41 Strong ties developed between MENFOP, training institutions, the Chamber of Commerce, private sector players, employers and businesses and other 
stakeholders. 
42 Ensure a clear line of sight communications between ministries, departments and other higher-level agencies and the frontline training provider both in 
the public and private sector. 
43 The initial idea is to include the following countries: Kenya, Morocco, and the Philippines.  These countries have been chosen as they give different 
approaches employed to get to these different TVET authorities. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483) 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 68  
     
 
to MENFOP’s curriculum writing department, and in some cases, the entities that have been entrusted 
with task of helping build skills in particular sectors44.  For example, if MAERSK was contracted to provide 
training on procurement and shipping logistics’, then these SWGs could simply adopt these training 
standards used by MAERSK and locally contextualized for Djibouti.  For the SWG focused on the shipping 
industry, participants could include the MOF, MENFOP, MT, Transport Ministry, P