[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 120000 chars → Filtered: 101629 chars (15.3% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
 
1. 
Djibouti has a geographically strategic location for international trade and security. Djibouti is a small 
lower middle-income and highly urbanized country of just under one million people located on the northeast coast 
of the Horn of Africa (HoA). Djibouti’s geographic location gives it an advantage in terms of international maritime 
trade and security. About 30 percent of global shipping travels through Djibouti’s waters and 85 percent of Djibouti 
port throughput is linked to landlocked Ethiopia. Djibouti hosts many international military bases, including those 
of China, France, Italy, Japan, Saudi Arabia, Spain, the United States, and others.  
 
2. 
Djibouti’s economic performance was strong prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. During the 2015-2019 
period, Djibouti’s gross domestic product (GDP) grew by an annual 7.2 percent, driven by transportation, logistics, 
telecommunication, and banking sector services linked to an economic boom in neighboring Ethiopia. The average 
inflation rate was kept under 1.4 percent. The overall fiscal deficit (on a commitment basis) declined significantly 
from 15.4 percent of GDP in 2015 to 0.5 percent in 2019, driven by a reduction in spending from 41.9 percent of 
GDP to 25.3 percent of GDP as infrastructure projects, mostly railway and water pipeline tapered off. Tax revenues 
have also decreased, from 14.4 percent of GDP in 2015 to 12.4 percent in 2019, due mainly to special tax regimes 
and exemptions, including for free trade zones and military bases. The overall current account balance (excluding 
the free zones) reached a surplus of 3.2 percent of GDP in 2019, as a result increased of trade with Ethiopia. 
 
3. 
Djibouti’s economy has come under immense stress due to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, and more 
recently due to the conflict situation over the past year and a half in neighboring Ethiopia. Djibouti’s output 
growth is expected to reach 4.3 percent in 2021. Year-on-year inflation rose by 2.5 percent at the end of 2021, 
driven by the recovery of domestic demand, high global commodity prices, and recurrent shortages in imports of 
fresh food from Ethiopia. On the fiscal front, the overall deficit of the central government remained low at 1.8 
percent of GDP in 2021, owing to the rationalization of wages and salaries and the reduction of transfers to state-
owned enterprises that offset the fall in tax revenues resulting from generous new exemptions introduced in the 
2021 finance bill and continued pandemic-related tax reliefs. Despite the declared truce on March 24, 2022, 
further disruptions due to the prolonged crisis in Ethiopia and the lower confidence level generated by the state 
of emergency are expected to have a substantial and negative spillover onto Djibouti’s economy. GDP growth in 
Djibouti could hover between 2.7 and 4.3 percent in 2022. Furthermore, humanitarian and security costs resulting 
from potential migratory movements from Ethiopia would exacerbate fiscal fragility created by the COVID-19 
pandemic. As a net importer of food and energy, the economic consequences of the war in Ukraine and associated 
sanctions would likely affect Djibouti’s external account through higher import bills. 
 
4. 
Although classified as a lower middle-income country, high rates of inequality persist, as reflected in a 
Gini coefficient of 0.42. Despite recent economic growth and trend of decreasing inequality, an estimated 17 
percent of Djiboutians live in extreme poverty (less than US$ 1.90/day) based on the 2017-18 household survey. 
This extreme poverty rate is estimated to have increased to 23-30 percent due to the impoverishing effects of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Poverty is pervasive in Djibouti with 74 percent of refugees living on less than US$3 per day1. 
While rural areas comprise only 15 percent of the total population, they account for 45 percent of the poor. There 
are significant regional disparities in poverty levels: 10 percent in Djibouti City (mostly concentrated in the suburb 
 
1 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), 2017 data. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 64  
     
 
of Balbala, which accounts for 37 percent of the country’s poor, due to a large number of refugees, migrants and 
displaced people living in this area), 23 percent in Ali Sabieh, 28 percent in Arta, 36 percent in Obock, 51 percent 
in Dikhil, and 61 percent in Tadjourah.  
 
5. 
Djibouti suffers from low human capital and human development indicators with a Human 
Development Index (HDI) value of 0.524 in 2019, ranking 166 out of 189 countries in the HDI ranking. Djibouti is 
one of the few countries that doesn’t have a score in the World Bank’s Human Capital Index2. While Djibouti’s HDI 
value increased by 49.3 percent between 1995 and 2019from 0.351 to 0.524, significant human development 
challenges remain. Half of the total population and 57 percent of women are illiterate. Poor human capital 
outcomes are observed throughout the lifecycle with poor health outcomes, as reflected among others in the very 
low adult survival rate of 62 years. The lack of access to basic water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services also 
challenges human capital accumulation. The situation is worse in rural areas; for instance, only 47 percent of the 
rural population has access to basic drinking water (versus 83 percent in urban areas), and only 19 percent of the 
rural population has access to safely managed sanitation (versus 41 percent in urban areas). The 2017-18 
household survey, nquete Djiboutienne Aupres des Menages pour les indicateurs sociaux (EDAM4-IS)3, shows 
correlation between poor water and sanitation and increased occurrences of ill-health episodes.  
 
6. 
Significant gender inequalities persist in Djibouti, throughout the lifecycle. Rural women with low levels 
of education and poor socio-economic status as well as female refugees suffer disproportionately from the 
multisectoral effects of gender inequalities. The persistence of harmful gender norms affects access to productive 
resources and limits progress towards gender equality. School enrollment in general and in technical education is 
growing, but the gender gaps in female-to-male enrollment ratios (82 percent in primary, 72 percent in secondary, 
and 61 percent in higher education) increase with each level. Unequal access to quality health services particularly 
affects the sexual and reproductive health of women. The multiplicity of measures taken to economically 
empower women did not necessarily promote their equitable access to economic opportunities. The prevalence 
of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM)4, despite being illegal5, remains one of the highest in Africa (93 percent) and 
is a strong impediment to women’s human and economic development opportunities. A gap remains between 
national legislation and international/regional instruments ratified on gender equality, which have supra-legal 
value. The most visible positive result of recent government’s efforts is with regards to women’s participation in 
decision-making bodies; the quota system legislated in 2018 requiring at least 25 percent of parliament seats be 
held by women, led to an increase of female Members of Parliament from 11 percent to 26 percent between 2002 
and 2018. 
 
7. 
Food insecurity, exacerbated by the war in Ukraine, compounds Djibouti’s human development 
challenges. In 2021, Djibouti ranked 99th out of 116 countries with a Global Hunger Index 6 score of 27.4. Only 
about 1,000 square kilometers or 0.04 percent of the country’s total land area is considered arable. According to 
the World Food Program (WFP), 90 percent of food is imported. About 10 percent of the population are food 
insecure and among them, 60 percent live in rural areas and depend on agriculture-based livelihoods. The war in 
Ukraine has already had an impact on global wheat prices and is likely to have a significant impact on food access 
 
2 Due to insufficient country data, Djibouti has not been included in the Human Capital Index assessment by the World Bank.  
3 https://microdata.worldbank.org/index.php/catalog/3463/related-materials 
4 United Nations strives for full eradication of FGM by 2030. 
5 Djibouti prohibits the practice of FGM through Article 333 of the Penal Code, which criminalizes and punishes its performance; 
Subsequent amendments to the law have included criminalizing the failure to report FGM and aiding and abetting the practice. 
6 https://www.globalhungerindex.org/djibouti.html 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 64  
     
 
in Djibouti since over 80 percent of wheat demand is met by imports. This demand is expected to be even higher 
during the month of Ramadan (April/May 2022) and supply may be further hindered by export restrictions from 
Russia and Ukraine to meet their domestic wheat demand should the conflict continue.   
 
8. 
In addition, Djibouti’s high vulnerability to climate change constrains human and economic 
development. While the strategic location defines much of Djibouti's current economic growth strategy, location 
is also a concern when considering the impacts of climate change and the expected trends likely to be seen in the 
coming years. The Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative (ND-GAIN) Index7 places Djibouti at 123 out of 181 
countries due to its very high vulnerability to impacts of climate change; Djibouti is expected to experience adverse 
impacts from increased temperatures, increased aridity, reduced precipitation, and rising sea levels. Mean annual 
temperatures are projected to increase by 1°C every twenty years, with monthly average temperatures expected 
to rise by 1.9°C by 2050 and a staggering 4.5°C by 2100. These temperature increases are likely to be associated 
with intense heat waves, with cold spells and cold nights expected to decrease, which will have significant 
consequences for human and animal health, biodiversity, and water resources.  
 
9. 
Adverse impact of climate change is to exert further stress on agriculture, water resources, health 
systems and physical infrastructures. Climate change is expected to increase the risk and intensity of water 
scarcity and drought across the country. The primary sectors affected are water, agriculture, coastal zones, human 
health, and livestock. At the same time, Djibouti is also vulnerable to episodes of flooding, which contribute to the 
deterioration of physical infrastructure and exerts stress on service delivery. The projected increase in extreme 
heat, heatwaves, flooding and increasing aridity and drought events are of significant concern for the health of 
Djibouti’s population, and disproportionately affect poor and rural populations, refugees and asylum seekers, and 
the most vulnerable among them being women, children and elderly. As one of the most water scarce countries 
in the world, these climate related events would continue to play havoc with human and livestock populations in 
the coming century. Further consequences of these climate pressures are increased incidences of food insecurity, 
increased forecast of water and vector borne diseases, exerting further pressure on human health. 
 
Refugee Situation in Djibouti 
 
10. 
Since the 1970s, Djibouti’s stability in an unstable region has made it an attractive destination for 
refugees from neighboring countries. Per United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) estimates, as 
of February 28, 2022, Djibouti is hosting 34,990 registered refugees and asylum seekers, concentrated in three 
regions: Djibouti City (7,103), Ali Sabieh (25,025) and Obock (2,862)(Figure 1). There are two locations within Ali 
Sabieh - Ali-Addeh (17,013) and Holl-Holl (8,012). These numbers represent the total number of both refugees 
and asylum seekers, while the count of only refugees in these locations is: 5,864 in Djibouti City, 2,813 in Obock, 
and 14,743 in Ali Sabieh (11,797 in Ali-Addeh and 2,946 in Holl-Holl). This represents a total of 8,865 households 
with 3,033 of them being in Djibouti city, 2,454 in Holl-Holl, 4,442 in Ali-Addeh, and 1,614 in Obock. The current 
number of refugees and asylum seekers constitutes about 3.4 percent (2.34 percent if considering only refugees) 
of the total population living in Djibouti, putting it within the countries with the highest ratio of refugees to local 
population in the world. Around three-fourths of refugees are women and children. The government recorded an 
additional 150,000 migrants who live in host communities as well as l hundreds of thousands of people who pass 
through Djibouti each year. Fifty-three percent of this population has no schooling at all. 
 
7 https://gain-new.crc.nd.edu/country/djibouti 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 64  
     
 
Figure 1: Map of refugee and asylum-seeker populations in Djibouti, as of February 28, 2022 
 
Source: UNHCR 
 
11. 
The fragile, conflict and violence (FCV) context in countries surrounding Djibouti, including the recent 
conflict in Ethiopia (despite the recently declared truce), is likely to increase the inflow of refugees, asylum 
seekers and migrants. Furthermore, failed rainy seasons and droughts increase the number of climate refugees 
as these populations are particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. The number of registered 
refugees substantially increased in recent years, from 17,683 in 2016 to 23,478 in February 2022. So far, relatively 
few people have fled to Djibouti from the conflict in Ethiopia, compared to the intensity of the conflict over the 
past year and a half or the preparations made by the Government of Djibouti (GoD). The GoD was prepared to 
host as many as 5,000 new Ethiopian refugees in Holl-Holl; refugees from the Afar ethnic group at a site near 
Dikhil; to potentially reactivate the decommissioned Aour Aoussa refugee camp; and, to establish new camps near 
Tadjoura (where a site has been pre-selected) if needed. At the current rate of forced displacement, there is 
adequate capacity at Holl-Holl alone.  
 
12. 
There are four distinct refugee situations with differences in size, demographics, and prospects.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 64  
     
 
i) 
Somali refugees live in two camps (called refugee villages) in the Ali Sabieh region (Ali Addeh and 
Holl-Holl camps). Over half of them arrived after the 2008 drought, but some have been in the 
region for nearly three decades. More than half are under 18 years of age. Djibouti grants refugees 
from south-central Somalia prima facie refugee status. 
ii) 
Ethiopian refugees, fleeing ethnic violence compounded by persistent drought or conflict, live in 
the two camps in Ali Sabieh region and in Djibouti City. They are not recognized as prima facie 
refugees and must apply for asylum individually. 
iii) 
Yemeni refugees live in the Markazi refugee camp, in Obock, and in Djibouti City. Many have strong 
family, cultural, social, and linguistic ties with some Djiboutian communities. They are recognized 
prima facie as refugees. 
iv) 
Eritrean refugees, mainly young single males with basic education fleeing mandatory national 
service, live in Ali Sabieh and Djibouti City. They do not receive prima facie recognition as refugees 
and must apply for asylum individually. 
 
13. 
Certain subpopulations of refugees face pressing challenges meeting basic needs. While all refugees in 
Markazi live in permanent structures with running water and electricity, only 10 and 12 percent of refugee 
households in the Ali Addeh and Holl-Holl camps, respectively, live in permanent structures. Refugees and 
economic migrants in host communities, such as Balbala, a suburb of Djibouti City, live under precarious conditions 
with inadequate shelter, employment opportunities, or access to basic services. Many also face acute food 
insecurity. 
 
14. 
For the past four decades, in line with the Global Compact on Refugees8, the GoD has maintained an 
open-door policy for refugees. In 2016, the Parliament adopted a National Refugee Law, which was promulgated 
in 2017. The Law provides a legal framework for the protection of refugee rights, facilitates integration of refugees 
and host communities and is implemented through two decrees, including the right to movement and access to 
legal employment and social services such as health and education. The Law grants refugees all rights enjoyed by 
Djiboutians, with the sole exception of the right to vote. Refugee support has three pillars: (i) “institutional and 
legislative strengthening”, which includes progressive reforms to facilitate the implementation of the National 
Refugee Law and inter alia encompasses better integration of refugees into labor markets, facilitates registration, 
and helps gain access to civil documentation; (ii) “improving access to basic services, particularly education and 
health” 9 which consists of improving the quality of health services in host communities by enhancing existing 
facilities and training health personnel, integrating health facilities into the national public health system, and 
strengthening the national epidemiological and endemic surveillance and monitoring systems; and, (iii) “social 
protection and economic promotion”, which attempts to ensure that refugees and host populations have access 
to adequate social assistance by extending universal health coverage (UHC) and the cash transfer programs to 
refugees, and promoting economic opportunities.  
 
15. 
Djibouti meets all three criteria to access financing from the IDA19 Window for Host Communities and 
Refugees (WHR): (i) Djibouti’s refugee population is 2.34 percent of the total population; (ii) the World Bank Group 
(WBG) in consultation with UNHCR has determined that Djibouti adheres to a framework for the protection of 
refugees that is adequate for the purpose of the WHR and the adequacy of the protection framework has been 
 
8 https://www.unhcr.org/en-us/the-global-compact-on-refugees.html 
9 The Government has demonstrated its commitment to integrating refugee populations in the national health system as evidenced by 
proactively rolling out the COVID-19 vaccinations for these populations. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 64  
     
 
reconfirmed by UNHCR on February 15, 2022; and (iii) the GoD has articulated a strategic approach to move 
towards long-term solutions that benefit refugees and host communities. 
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
16. 
Djibouti’s health outcomes have improved over the last two decades (Figure 2), generally surpassing 
the HoA averages but lag behind those of peer lower middle-income countries as well as Middle East and North 
Africa (MENA) countries (Table 1). However, the country performs worse than HoA averages in two child health 
indicators: neonatal mortality rate and severe wasting. Djibouti’s under-five mortality rate of 58 deaths per 1,000 
live births and maternal mortality ratio of 248 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births are almost three and five 
times higher than MENA averages, respectively (Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2: Progress on key health outcomes 
 
Sources: World Bank, Implementation Status and Results Reports (P131194) (facility quality); Government of Djibouti and Unite Nations 
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) (2011, 2013, 2019), Standardized Monitoring and Assessment of Relief and Transitions (SMART) Survey Results 
(stunting in survey years); World Bank, World Development Indicators (others) 
27.1
30.8 33.5
29.7
20.9
62686471
7289
88
81827884
68768485
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percent
Key child health indicators
Stunting (under-5)
Immunization, DPT (12-23 months)
96
9491898684817976747270686563615958
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Deaths per 1,000 live births
Under-5 mortality rate
29 37
38
3…41
46
59
59
51
45
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Percent
Average facility quality
470
449 426
393 361
335
320
299283
272
262
256
256
247
246
248
0
100
200
300
400
500
Deaths per 100,000 live births
Maternal mortality ratio
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 64  
     
 
Note: Average facility quality is a customized indicator. For different levels of care, there are different sets of criteria to measure quality 
(availability of services, hygiene practices, data management, etc.). Each facility was rated on the extent to which criteria were met. 
Table 1: Key maternal and child health outcomes for Djibouti, select comparator countries and MENA10 
 
MORTALITY 
STUNTING 
WASTING 
TOTAL 
FERTILITY 
RATE 
TOTAL 
HEALTH 
SPENDING 
GOVERNMENT 
HEALTH SPENDING 
MATERNAL 
NEONATAL 
UNDER-5 
 
PER 
100,000 
PER 1,000 
PER 
1,000 
% 
% 
PER 
WOMAN 
% OF 
GDP 
% OF 
GDP 
% OF 
BUDGET 
DJIBOUTI 
248 
31 
58 
34 
22 
2.7 
2.3 
4.3 
1.2 
Most similar countries 
Cabo Verde 
58 
9 
15 
- 
- 
2.2 
5.4 
10.4 
3.2 
Kyrgyz Republic 
60 
12 
18 
12 
2 
3.3 
6.5 
8.4 
2.8 
Dominica 
- 
28 
35 
- 
- 
1.9 
6.6 
7.0 
4.3 
Jordan 
46 
9 
16 
8 
2 
2.7 
7.8 
12.4 
3.8 
Togo 
396 
25 
67 
24 
6 
4.3 
6.2 
4.3 
1.1 
Regional averages 
MENAb REGION 
52 
11 
20 
16 
6 
2.8 
5.6 
3.1 
9.2 
Excluding HICsc 
58 
13 
22 
17 
6 
2.9 
5.9 
2.9 
9.2 
Horn of Africad 
452 
28 
58 
36 
8 
4.3 
3.2 
0.9 
3.8 
Source: Merchandise export diversification is the latest available year from UNCTAD Stat, United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development. All other indicators are the latest available year from World Development Indicators, World Bank 
 
17. 
Communicable diseases and childhood health conditions (including malnutrition) still dominate 
Djibouti’s burden of disease. They account for seven out of the top ten causes of women’s and girls’ deaths (Figure 
3) (six out of ten for both sexes). Water-borne diarrheal diseases exacerbated by climate change, including 
unpredictable rainfall and rising temperatures account for 8 percent of under-5 deaths. Similarly, the incidence of 
 
10 Notes: 
a) Based on a “dissimilarity index,” constructed as follows: Total population, GNI per capita, official development 
assistance as a share of GNI, and merchandise export diversification where each is standardized by taking the z-
score across countries. Each country of the 138 with sufficient data was compared to Djibouti, and the resulting 
sum of squared differences across the four standardized variables is the index. 
b) Middle East and North Africa, World Bank classification 
c) High-income countries (HICs), according to the World Bank FY22 classification 
d) 
Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, and Somalia 
e) 
For consistency across countries, this table employs nutrition estimates from the UNICEF-WHO-WB Joint Child 
Malnutrition Estimates, which indicate a substantially higher rate of stunting than found by the Djibouti 2019 
SMART survey.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 64  
     
 
malaria, a vector-borne disease also exacerbated by climate change, is rapidly increasing (Figure 3). Based on 
findings from the 2017-18 household survey, the top two causes for households seeking healthcare for children 
under five years of age and under one in the past 30 days is malaria/fever and diarrhea (Figure 4).  
 
Figure 3: Top causes of deaths in Djibouti 
 
  
Source: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 64  
     
 
Figure 4: Main health problem, last 30 days 
Children under 5                  
 
 
 
Children under 1 
 
Source: World Bank visualization based on the 2017-2018 EDAM survey 
 
18. 
Poor nutrition outcomes for children are pervasive across the country and are often linked to incidence 
of diarrheal diseases in childhood and increased risk of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) in adulthood. 
Undernutrition accounts for 57 percent of deaths among children under five; it is widespread, with 17 percent 
underweight and 25 percent stunted with no gender differentials. The stunting rate is higher among rural (34 
percent) than urban children (19 percent). Some lagging regions experience higher burden of stunting: 40.2, 33.3, 
and 32.6 percent in Obock, Dikhil and Tadjourah, respectively. At the same time, deaths due to NCDs such as 
ischemic heart disease, stroke, cirrhosis, and diabetes have increased significantly between 2009 and 2019. 
Obesity11 rates are also on the rise – 18.3 percent for women, 8.6 percent for men, and about 5 percent for 
children. The poor adult health outcomes, including a high burden of NCDs, are in part driven by nutrition and 
health deficiencies accumulated in early childhood12. Human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome (HIV/AIDS) also remains a key cause of mortality, which makes the double burden of disease prevalent 
in Djibouti, a key challenge for improved health outcomes through the lifecycle. 
 
19. 
Despite national efforts, harmful gender norms increase the burden of disease for women and 
negatively affect the health system in Djibouti. Gender equality has been central in the design of the “Djibouti 
2035 Vision” and the government has implemented several national plans and programs promoting gender 
equality, women empowerment and the eradication of all forms of excision. One of the five priorities set out in 
the government’s Djibouti vision 2035 is improving access to and quality of health care, including sexual and 
reproductive health, and ensuring that everyone can exercise their reproductive rights. However, despite the 
adoption of a special law criminalizing FGM and the government’s efforts to fulfill its national, regional, and 
international commitments to eradicate the crime, FGM prevalence remains one of the highest in Africa and in 
the world (93 percent) and poses serious threats to this national priority. Moreover, the medicalization of FGM 
remains an issue with 20 percent of FGM performed by health professionals, and the health care costs directly 
attributed to FGM are around US$1.13 million per year. The National Committee for the Total Abandonment of 
All Forms of Excision is still operational, under the supervision of the Ministry of Women and Family. The United 
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)-United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) United Nations Joint Program to 
Accelerate the Elimination of FGM (UNJP) have been working with the government since 2008, but effective 
 
11 A body mass index (BMI) over 25 is considered overweight, and over 30 is obese. 
12 IHME, 2021, https://www.healthdata.org/djibouti  
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 64  
     
 
coordination across the Ministry of Health (MOH) and the Ministry of Women and Family is still lacking on both 
preventive and curative sides. 
 
20. 
The health system is highly vulnerable to climate change. In the past, an average daily increase in 
temperature between 0.5°C and 1.5°C only slightly increased health facilities' demand for cooling and water, and 
the design of the facilities' building systems has been able to accommodate these needs. However, projections 
indicate that average daily temperatures will rise by up to 2.4°C through 2050 and the number of hot days per 
year will increase. These changes in extreme temperature may induce heat exhaustion among health workers and 
limit their physical ability to provide healthcare. The health facilities may require increased cooling to prevent 
heat stress on patients and health workers. Climate change is also contributing to unpredictable rainfall leading 
to both droughts and floods with catastrophic impact on health infrastructure as well as increased climate 
migration thus placing a higher strain on the health system. In addition, flooding due to cyclones is possible in the 
capital.  
 
21. 
Djibouti experienced a humanitarian crisis due to flash floods in 2019 and 2020, and such events are 
likely to increase due to climate change. Djibouti’s average rainfall is 127mm per year or less, but during a three-
day period in November 2019, almost 300mm of rainfall was recorded. This resulted in a humanitarian crisis, which 
affected 20,000 households, and resulted in 11 deaths. At the time, 14 health centers were severely damaged in 
Djibouti City alone. The World Bank responded by activating the Contingent Emergency Response Component 
(CERC) in March 2020 under the Towards Zero Stunting and Responding to COVID-19 and Other Emergencies 
(P164164) to help the country deal with the impact of the floods. Subsequently, another episode of heavy rains 
struck in April 2020. The heavy rains caused abnormal humidity which in turn triggered a desert locust invasion, 
causing damages to and further threatening the country’s food supply. This triggered another activation of the 
CERC in April 2020. Climate change is expected to significantly increase cases of vector-borne diseases such as 
malaria and water-borne diseases such as diarrhea, which affect young children more and are a leading cause of 
illness and death among children under-five and contribute to stunting and wasting through micronutrient 
depletion. Climate change, especially the increased frequency of heatwaves, will also increase the burden of NCDs, 
particularly respiratory and cardiovascular diseases. This poses a risk of overwhelming the health system, which 
is already facing significant resource constraints.  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 64  
     
 
Figure 5: Incidence of malaria (per 1,000 population at risk) 
 
Source: WHO, Global Health Observatory 
 
22. 
Djibouti’s public health infrastructure is not climate resilient. The country has a total of 64 health 
facilities – 55 primary health care (PHC) facilities, five secondary hospitals (one in each of the five regions), and 
four tertiary hospitals, three of which are in Djibouti City. The Ali Sabieh region, home to two out of the country’s 
three refugee camps, has one secondary hospital as well as the only tertiary hospital outside of Djibouti City. The 
Obock region, home to the one remaining refugee camp has one secondary hospital. In addition to these facilities, 
there is also the community health platform which is nascent and fragmented. With ongoing decentralization in 
service delivery, regions are responsible for the provision of primary and secondary care. The private sector is 
nascent and mostly concentrated in the capital city. The central drug store (Centrale d’Achat des Medicaments et 
Matériels Essentiels – CAMME) already struggles to ensure a reliable cold chain for vaccines and some essential 
medicines; with additional temperature and weather stresses, its warehouse is further deteriorating. The 
catastrophic effects on health infrastructure due to recent floods underscore its climatic vulnerability and urgency 
to rehabilitate it using climate resilient building standards.   
 
23. 
Despite past investments, health infrastructure gaps remain (especially outside of Djibouti City) and 
organization of services is sub-optimal. Nationally, there are 3.2 maternity beds for every 1,000 pregnant women, 
well below the World Health Organization (WHO) recommended number of 10 per 1,000 pregnant women. There 
are 10.7 hospital beds per 10,000 inhabitants, of which only 51 percent are functional. Facilities do not have 
adequate basic inputs for their operations (Table 2). Trauma services are only for stabilization of patients and air 
ambulance transfer. The organization of service delivery does not consider factors beyond geographical access to 
maximize quality of care and user confidence. Referral mechanisms are underdeveloped. As a result, the 
organization and networking of care is less than optimal.  
 
Table 2: Availability of basic inputs in health facility (2015) 
SARA findings on basic 
inputs  
Facilities with all 
elements (%) 
Average level of 
availability (%) 
Essential medicines  
2 
32  
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 64  
     
 
Essential equipment  
39  
82  
Diagnostic tests  
1  
26  
Source: Service Availability and Readiness Assessment (SARA) survey, 2015 
 
24. 
Health service delivery has improved but progress is comparatively slow and incomplete. Coverage of 
essential health services as measured by the Sustainable Development Goals Indicator 3.8.1 improved from 32 
percent in 2005 to 47 percent in 2017.13 Skilled birth attendance increased from 61 percent in 2003 to 87 percent 
in 2012. In 2021, only 7.75percent of pregnant women received four or more antenatal care (ANC) visits, while 54 
percent receive at least one postnatal care visit within 40 days after birth. There are also significant regional 
differences in service delivery. The proportion of children 12-23 months of age who have received the third dose 
of the pentavalent vaccine14 is at 68.1 percent nationwide; however, it varies a lot across regions, ranging from 
54.4 percent in Art to 73.3 percent in Tadjourah.  
 
25. 
Djibouti has experimented with innovative financing mechanisms which have shown some promise in 
improving quality and quantity of services. Djibouti has implemented the first generation of Performance-based 
Financing (PBF) through the Improving Health Systems Performance project (Projet d’Amélioration de la 
Performance du Secteur de la Santé or PAPSS - P131194). The PBF scheme was designed to enable contracted 
health facilities to have the autonomy to use earned funds for non-salary operating costs, including for basic 
maintenance, the purchase of drugs and consumables, and to incentivize facility staff through performance 
bonuses. This was done by rewarding contracted facilities for improved performance based on a menu of agreed 
quantity and quality indicators that were reported quarterly and verified by an Independent Verification Agent 
(IVA). This scheme has shown some improvements in the quality of health services provided at the facility level 
with the quality score increasing from 19.61 percent in Q3 2018 to 43 percent by Q1 2021. However, these scores 
were significantly below the 60 percent which is the acceptable standard. Quantity indicators showed far better 
improvements with the number of women completing two or more antenatal visits, increasing from 6,100 in June 
2014 to 111,987 in March 2021, and the percentage of children fully immunized, increasing from 32 percent in 
December 2012 to 62 percent in December 2020. The government is planning to pilot a Direct Facility Financing 
(DFF) scheme. The DFF is similar to PBF since it also finances non-salary operating costs at the facility level. As it is 
not linked to health performance indicators, or their verification and it does not finance performance bonuses for 
staff, DFF is significantly cheaper to administer. With DFF, facilities are paid after conditions in the DFF contract, 
such as management arrangements, previous period fund utilization and transparent use of funds have been met. 
In Nigeria, DFF payments were based on the estimated average of total payments to be earned by the PBF facilities 
and were provided directly to the facilities on a quarterly basis. Conclusions of an impact evaluation15 indicate 
that both PBF and DFF showed significant improvements over business-as-usual for service provision and quality 
 
13 Sustainable Development Goals Indicator 3.8.1 is the average coverage of essential services based on 14 tracer interventions including 
reproductive, maternal, newborn and child health, infectious diseases, non-communicable diseases, and service capacity and access 
among the general and the most disadvantaged population. 
14 Pentavalent vaccine is a combination five-in-one vaccine with five individual vaccines against Diphtheria, Pertussis, Tetanus, Hepatitis B 
and Hib conjugated into one. 
15 Khanna, M., Loevinsohn, B., Pradhan, E. et al. Decentralized facility financing versus performance-based payments in primary health 
care: a large-scale randomized controlled trial in Nigeria. BMC Med 19, 224 (2021). 
https://nam11.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fdoi.org%2F10.1186%2Fs12916-021-02092-
4&amp;data=04%7C01%7Cabesarabic%40worldbank.org%7C6c423262859f4ca0f7c108da1808322b%7C31a2fec0266b4c67b56e2796d8f5
9c36%7C0%7C0%7C637848720729107306%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiL
CJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000&amp;sdata=XjmxQQ4G5vRLbpM5BffJlisatAF0uWVD%2BIL68PSeCx0%3D&amp;reserved=0  
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 64  
     
 
of care, and aside from institutional deliveries, PBF and DFF results did not differ from each other. The exact design 
of the second generation PBF and DFF is yet to be finalized.  
 
26. 
Service delivery optimization can increase RMNCAH-N attainment. UHC aims to provide full population 
access to an essential package of health services without the risk of financial hardship; universal effective coverage 
advances this concept by accounting for health services that meet minimum quality standards, setting the goal 
that every person gets the right care at the right place at the right time, every time. Health systems have varying 
levels of care delivery platforms to respond to a diversity of health needs, yet these platforms often deliver care 
that is inappropriate to their capacities, as in the case of labor and delivery services at the community level or 
primary care delivered at the hospital level. In Djibouti, both access and quality of care are concerns, as reflected 
in the low Healthcare Access and Quality Index of 35. High-functioning health facilities are few and there are great 
urban-rural disparities in service coverage. Only 44 percent of health facilities are equipped for Basic Emergency 
Obstetric and Newborn Care(BEmONC), and just 5 percent have Comprehensive Emergency Obstetric and 
Newborn Care (CEmONC) capabilities.16 Meanwhile access to high-performing services at community and primary 
care levels is limited. Quality of care is a particular concern: the maternal mortality rate remains high despite high 
skilled birth attendance, and timeliness of patient-centered care is a pervasive issue. Inefficient matching of health 
service supply with need, limits the value of health service delivery by decreasing effectiveness and/or increasing 
cost. Appropriate matching of health need with level of care can ensure that the resource-intensive hospital 
platform is reserved for the relative few with emergent, complex, or highly specialized health needs (e.g., cesarean 
delivery), while less resource-intensive primary health service delivery platforms serve the relative many with low-
acuity, low-complexity health needs (e.g., antenatal management of gestational diabetes). Such matching—
termed health service optimization—improves effectiveness, efficiency, and patient-centeredness when 
distributed geographically, and is therefore critical to delivering universal effective coverage.   
 
27. 
Various demand-side barriers also remain. Harmful socio-cultural beliefs and practices hinder health 
seeking behaviors and good health outcomes. For example, as noted earlier, FGM is nearly universal with 93 
percent of girls and women having undergone the procedure most commonly between infancy and age 15. 
Transportation, difficult terrain, and heat all contribute to lower demand for services, including low ANC and 
postnatal visits. Financial barriers to care are significant, particularly for the poor in rural areas and the refugees 
and poor in Balbala, where poverty is particularly high. While there is a basic package of services for primary care, 
certain medicines and laboratory tests are not covered, adding to the financial burden on families and thus further 
increasing barriers to adequate care. At the population level, there is little citizen engagement and patient 
empowerment, and thus little social accountability. 
 
28. 
Inadequate management of health care waste is part of the health infrastructure gap. Despite 
investments in constructing five artisanal incinerators, as part of the PAPSS project, the country’s capacity to 
manage health care waste (proper segregation and treatment) remains extremely limited due to the lack of 
physical infrastructure and trained personnel. In addition, poor management of incinerators might shorten their 
lifespans. 
 
 
16 Emergency Obstetric and Newborn Care (EmONC) is a package of life-saving interventions in the peripartum period; basic 
(BEmONC)can be delivered at lower-level health facilities (e.g., health centers) and includes interventions like parenteral medicines or 
assisted vaginal delivery, while comprehensive (CEmONC)requires greater concentration of resources such as a hospital can provide and 
includes interventions like blood transfusions and cesarean deliveries. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 64  
     
 
29. 
 Human resources for health (HRH) are a key supply-side constraint. Many health sector weaknesses 
stem from the low numbers and limited capacity and motivation of health workers across Djibouti, even though 
training and recruitment of health personnel are on an upward trajectory, with the number of health personnel 
increasing by 103 percent between 2008 and 2017. In 2017, there were 1.4 physicians, 3.5 nurses, and 2.2 
midwives per 10,000 population, respectively, for a total of 7.0 skilled health workers per 10,000 inhabitants 17 
compared to the WHO recommendations of a total of 44.5 per 10,000 inhabitants as the minimum density 
required to provide UHC.18 Outside of Djibouti City (which has a total of 9 skilled health workers per 10,000 
inhabitants), there are some regions with particularly severe HRH shortages: fewer than 0.6 general practitioners 
and fewer than 1 midwife per 10,000 inhabitants in Tadjourah, Ali-Sabieh, and Dikhil; and just over 2 nurses per 
10,000 inhabitants in Dikhil and Tadjourah. Further, continuing education for health personnel is only provided 
through vertical programs, and there is no HRH development plan in place. 
 
30. 
Community health programs are nascent and fragmented. The Djibouti community health platform is 
made up of community health agents, community relays, women mobilizers, and health committees. Community 
health agents have been recruited into the civil service, put on the civil service payroll, further trained, and 
converted into facility-based providers who do not engage directly with communities. The MOH has a network of 
community health worker (CHW) volunteers, but they are not currently functional due to lack of funding. In 
addition, the Ministry of Social Affairs and Solidarity’s (Ministère des Affaires Sociales et des Solidarités, MASS) 
community health agents are currently conducting nutrition outreach, but only in Arhiba, Balbala and Obock. 
 
31. 
Other supply-side issues include governance, capacity, and institutional challenges. Decentralization, 
coordination, and accountability are key institutional challenges for the health system. The capacity of key 
institutions for stewardship or for service delivery is limited. Various important sub-sector policies, strategies, 
regulations, standards, and norms are yet to be developed, especially in the context of decentralization. 
Decentralization is a government priority, but it is not yet enacted; the latest national health strategic plan (Plan 
National de Développement Sanitaire, PNDS 2020-2024 anticipates creating sub-directorates of health in the 
regions to strengthen regional performance. Currently, there is no dedicated official responsibility at the regional 
level. The medical director of each regional hospital is the de-facto in-charge of the region. However, with heavy 
hospital management and medical duties, they are unable to adequately oversee their regions. The small but 
growing private sector is not well regulated by the MOH. Beyond the PBF scheme that was put in place under the 
recently closed World Bank-financed PAPSS project, accountability mechanisms in health care are nascent. Several 
mechanisms exist for coordination of activities within and beyond the government, including a Health Partners 
Group and issue-specific platforms. However, these groups do not meet regularly or otherwise have limited 
functionality. No multisectoral platform exists for nutrition. With respect to accountability, there are a number of 
participatory bodies: a National Forum, a Symposium on Health, and a Country Dialogue. However, these do not 
seem to have widespread visibility. Management and reporting structures also exhibit important gaps that 
constrain effective oversight of public services. A culture of using data for real-time decision making and 
improvement is yet to take root. Health information systems are also weak. The country does not have a 
systematic approach to quality of care and key quality improvement interventions such as accreditation, licensing, 
training, supportive supervision, clinical mentorship/coaching, and clinical audit are inconsistent. The 
comprehensive and timely PNDS does not seem to be officially published and there is also no overall performance 
framework subject to rigorous monitoring and evaluation (M&E).  
 
32. 
At US$71 per capita per year (Figure 6), Djibouti spends relatively less on health compared to other 
lower middle-income countries (US$98 per capita per year on average) and MENA (excluding high-income) 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 64  
     
 
(US$521 per capita per year). Prepayment for health services, a core tenet of UHC, accounted for about half of 
total health expenditure while out-of-pocket spending (OOPS) accounted for 29 percent and was the second 
largest source of financing in 2018. Although OOPS in Djibouti compares favorably to other lower middle-income 
countries, upper-middle income countries, or MENA (excluding high-income countries) where average OOPS is 
51, 33 and 41 percent, respectively, this might be due to foregone care. Legally, primary and secondary health 
services are free and available to both Djiboutians and non-nationals at government facilities. However, tertiary 
care is largely paid out-of-pocket, which acts as a deterrent to seeking care at the right level. In addition, the costs 
of medication are also paid out of pocket. The MASS has a scheme of subsidized health insurance for the poorest 
households to seek tertiary care and to cover the related cost of expensive drugs. However, the coverage of this 
program is low and its usage or the success of its implementation is unknown.  
 
Figure 6: Sources of Health Expenditures 
 
 Source: WHO Global Health Expenditure Database 
 
Health Service Needs and Access Among Refugee Populations 
 
33. 
The government has made concerted efforts to integrate health services for refugees into the national 
health system. The government continues to integrate health centers in refugee villages (camps) such as in Ali 
Addeh, promoting both host communities and refugees to use the same health centers. Registered refugees have 
had access to a parallel primary health care system initially set up as part of humanitarian assistance in camps. 
However, in January 2018, the MOH and the UNHCR signed a cooperation agreement for the inclusion of refugees 
in the national health system. Another agreement between the MASS, the WFP, and UNHCR in 2019 made 
provisions for the inclusion of refugees and asylum seekers in public health insurance, supported by a 
socioeconomic profiling of all refugees and asylum-seekers that is expected to result in the inclusion of 12,500 
vulnerable refugees in the Social Health Assistance Program (Programme d’Assistance Sociale de Santé, PASS). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 64  
     
 
The IDA19 Mid-Term Refugee Policy Review17 documented “a generally positive relationship in Djibouti between 
refugees and host communities and within the refugee communities themselves,” reflecting these and other 
initiatives by the National Office for Assistance to Refugees and Disaster Victims (Office National d’Assistance aux 
Réfugiés et Sinistrés, ONARS) and UNHCR to promote cohesion. Challenges in the provision of health services to 
refugee and host populations are similar, consisting of availability of specialist medical services, inadequate drugs 
and equipment, absence of awareness and preventive care. Apart from contingency planning mentioned above, 
there have been no substantial changes to refugee strategy or policy since the IDA19 Mid-Term Refugee Policy 
Review in mid-2020.  
 
34. 
Regional efforts to identify priorities in health for these populations are ongoing. In December 2021, the 
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)18 organized a high-level regional experts meeting on health 
to identify priority interventions and develop a draft action plan for refugee health, returnees and host 
communities to be endorsed by ministers of health and ministers in charge of refugees. On the basis of this plan, 
a commitment for a declaration on health for refugees, returnees and host communities will be developed in line 
with the Nairobi declaration on refugees. The priority actions aim to help with an effective integration of refugee 
populations into the national health system of member countries, including Djibouti.  
 
35. 
Access to health services is lower among refugee populations. By March 2021, with the support of the 
World Bank-financed PAPSS project, 46,900 displaced persons, including refugees, asylum seekers and migrants 
received services at health facilities. Nonetheless, refugees who need healthcare are less likely to be able to access 
it than urban Djiboutians. Among urban Djiboutians, 90 percent of those who needed care in a 30-day period 
received it, compared with 80 percent of refugees in camps and 66 percent of refugees in Djibouti City, according 
to a December 2020-January 2021 telephonic survey.19 Refugees were least likely to access care for child 
malnutrition (59 percent), chronic illness (72 percent) and maternal or reproductive care (77 percent). As to the 
most common reasons for not accessing care, refugees cite inability to pay fees (i.e., informal fees or fees for 
services not included in the basic package – 38 percent) and inability to afford the trip (31 percent). Women and 
girls, who account for 49 percent of refugees, face sexual and gender-based violence, as well as high rates of FGM 
and early marriage and require greater access to health services. 
  
36. 
As in other countries, refugees place additional demands on the health system. When refugees or 
asylum-seekers need higher-level care, they need to be transferred to tertiary facilities where they need additional 
support for transport, food and lodging. The financial resources provided by UNHCR and other development 
partners are insufficient to meet these extra needs, and refugee-support activities routinely must be cut back, 
reducing refugees’ access to higher-level health services among others.  
 
 
17 IDA, IDA19 Mid-Term Refugee Policy Review, Development Finance, Corporate IDA&IBRD (DFCII), September 23, 2021, available at: 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/826851636575674627/pdf/IDA19-Mid-Term-Refugee-Policy-Review.pdf 
18 IGAD comprises of eight countries that form a trade bloc with headquarters in Djibouti City. IGAD countries include: Djibouti, Eritrea, 
Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, and Uganda.   
19 National Statistical Institute of Djibouti, World Bank, and UNHCR. May 2021. Monitoring the socio-economic impacts of COVID-19 on 
Djiboutian and refugee households in Djibouti: Results from third wave of survey. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/35702 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 64  
     
 
 
Table 3: Key refugee sub-populations and health facility access 
 
Refugee and 
asylum-seeker 
population 
Health facilities 
Primary 
Referral 
Holl Holl camp 
8,012 
1 
1 
(Hôpital régional 
d'Ali Sabieh) 
Ali Adeh camp 
17,013 
1 
Ali Sabieh total health facilities 
9 
2 
Markazi camp 
2,862 
1 
1  
(Centre medical 
hospitalier 
d’Obock) 
Obock town 
1 
Obock total health facilities 
7 
1 
Djibouti City 
7,103 
14 
3 
Djibouti City total health facilities 
Dikhil total health facilities 
Arta total health facilities 
Tadjourah total health facilities 
14 
3 
8 
1 
6 
1 
11 
1 
National health facilities serving refugees 
18 
5 
Total national health facilities 
55 
9 
Source: UNHCR, MOH 
 
37. 
Integration of refugees into the national health system can improve the availability of services, but also 
exerts additional pressure on the health system. In certain communities, such as Balbala, displaced populations 
and refugees constitute 40 percent of consultations in health facilities. The MOH lacks a digital data system for 
service utilization disaggregated by refugee status and cannot therefore monitor refugee service utilization in total 
or at specific facilities. For refugee populations in particular, limited coverage of health services and WASH 
facilities among these populations increases the risk of disease outbreaks, such as acute watery diarrhea (e.g., 
cholera), measles, chicken pox and multi-drug resistant tuberculosis. 
 
38. 
Inadequate civil registration and vital statistics (CRVS) system as well as medical health information 
systems contribute to the challenges in health sector’s M&E and planning. The upcoming transition to the new 
national identification system, with unique ID, will help solve this challenge. However, a strategy to provide the 
unique ID is yet to be developed for refugee populations in Ali Addeh, Hol Hol and Obock. A lack of a unique ID is 
currently not presenting a barrier to access health services but ensuring that better patient/user data is collected 
at the point of service, including for refugee populations is essential for budgeting and M&E processes. 
 
39. 
Development partners are engaged in the health sector and on the refugee agenda in Djibouti. UNICEF 
focuses on building community structures for health service delivery accountability, working both on the demand 
for and supply of health services. It also has a strong focus on nutrition, given the high rates of stunting and 
malnutrition in Djibouti and is currently planning to use the community platform for improving nutrition indicators 
among children. UNICEF supports 33 health posts that contain nutrition units. In close collaboration with UNICEF 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 64  
     
 
and other development partners, the project will systematically finance the development and rollout of the 
community health platform with community-level nutrition interventions (among others). UNHCR is engaged on 
the refugee agenda in Djibouti, given the high numbers of refugees and asylum seekers. UNHCR is supporting the 
integration of health services across refugee camps and host communities, via an annual plan of action developed 
each year and overseen by a team housed in the MOH’s Directorate of Health Regions (Direction des Régions 
Sanitaires, DRS). The project will provide transport vouchers to bring refugee and poor patients to hospitals since 
this was highlighted by government and UNHCR as a key obstacle to accessing care. The Global Fund is financing 
the three diseases - malaria, HIV/AIDS, and tuberculosis - and is currently exploring ways, in collaboration with 
the World Bank, to support the Djiboutian Government on further advancing the refugee agenda. The World Bank 
and the Global Fund are also exploring the possibility of collaboration in geospatial mapping of health facilities as 
well as in other technical assistance to inform the service optimalization agenda. Other development partners 
active in Djibouti in the health sector include, for instance, the European Union, who are funding a nutrition 
project, and the Japanese government, through World Bank-administered grants.  
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
 
40. 
The project supports GoD’s current priorities in the health sector, as stated in the fourth PNDS, and 
future reforms that the GoD is planning to put in place. In 2020, the MOH adopted its fourth PNDS for the period 
2020–2024 that focuses on five strategic priorities: (i) expanding quality care in all regions; (ii) integrating 
promotive, preventive, and curative care; (iii) increasing accountability and good governance; (iv) strengthening 
health financing; and (v) strengthening the Health Management Information System (HMIS). The GoD recently 
announced plans to undertake extensive reforms in the health sector through a broad consultative process, 
named ‘les états-generaux’. The World Bank is working closely with the GoD on informing elements of the reform 
process that this project closely supports, notably on health system strengthening, focusing on quality 
improvements of services provided, strengthening of the human resources, to name a few.  
 
41. 
The project is fully aligned with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY22-
FY26) (Report No. 147787-DJ). The project is fully aligned with two CPF focus areas: (i) promoting inclusive private 
sector-led growth, job creation, and human capital; and (ii) strengthening the role and the capacity of the state. 
The project is also fully aligned with all three cross-cutting themes. It will seek to support the improvement of: (i) 
gender parity by improving the utilization and quality of key RMNCAH-N services by increasing awareness and 
demand for these services by both women and men; (ii) digital transformation by building on the District Health 
Information Software 2 (DHIS2) efforts, supported in previous projects as well as including routine household and 
health facility surveys to enable the triangulation of data, monitoring, planning and course correction in real time; 
(iii) transparency for good governance by promoting the publication of key RMNCAH-N data in the public domain; 
and (iv) climate change adaptation by bringing RMNCAH-N services closer to the underserved populations in the 
regions and among the refugee and host community populations and improving energy efficiency and climate 
resiliency by repairing existing facilities. 
 
42. 
The proposed Project will directly contribute to the WBG’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and 
boosting shared prosperity by investing in RMNCAH-N services and strengthening health systems more broadly, 
both of which would support Djibouti’s objectives of strengthening its human capital. 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 64  
     
 
43. 
The project is also aligned with the MENA Human Capital plan and the expanded MENA Regional 
Strategy (March 2019). The MENA Human Capital plan is an integral part of the MENA Regional Strategy, which 
emphasizes human capital development alongside digital development and private sector dynamism as drivers of 
economic transformation. The project is fully aligned as it will focus on several key multidimensional challenges. 
First, it will tackle spatial inequality, by bringing quality services to underserved areas and regions, as well as to 
underserved, refugee, and host community populations. Second, it will address health, specifically diseases caused 
by environmental factors, such as WASH, food, and climate. The human capital agenda in MENA uses a lifecycle 
approach and the project will contribute to: (i) building human capital by supporting population access to quality 
RMNCAH-N services; (ii) protecting human capital by specifically targeting underserved, refugee, and host 
community populations; and, (iii) utilizing human capital by contributing to human capital with particular attention 
to gender gaps. 
 
44. 
The project is fully aligned with the WBG’s Gender Strategy (FY16-23) and supports gender equality in 
Djibouti. The project contributes to Pillar 1 “improving human endowments” – through increasing access to and 
quality of RMNCAH-N services during the most vulnerable periods of a woman’s life, with a particular attention to 
women living in rural settings and women refugees who are facing cumulative and intersectional forms of gender 
inequalities; Pillar 2 “removing constraints for more and better jobs – by providing women with better care and 
in turn increasing their mobility capacity as well as their human and economic opportunities, and by providing 
new knowledge and skills in a gender transformative way to enable women to become actors of change; Pillar 4 
“enhancing women’s voice & agency and engaging men and boys” – by supporting activities that will empower 
women and youth to make decisions about their own bodies including legal literacy in regards to their rights, by 
involving and targeting women and men in awareness-raising campaigns on harmful traditional practices such as 
FGM, and by training health professionals on communication with and care of gender-based violence (GBV) 
survivors. The project will support: (a) collection of gender-disaggregated data and gender statistics in the 
project’s results framework wherever relevant and possible; (b) improving access to and utilization of RMNCAH-
N services by addressing both demand- and supply-side challenges, taking into consideration the full and equal 
participation of women and men; and (c) strengthening capacity of the MOH, including in the design, 
implementation and coordination of multi-sectoral issues such as stunting, climate resilience and FGM.

A. Project Development Objective 
PDO Statement 
 
To improve the utilization of quality reproductive, maternal, neonatal, child, adolescent health and nutrition 
(RMNCAH-N) services, with priority given to underserved areas, refugees and host communities 
 
PDO Level Indicators 
 
 
The PDO indicators will be: 
i) 
Percent of children fully immunized before their first birthday 
Among girls 
Among refugees  
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 64  
     
 
Among host community20 residents 
ii) 
Percent of pregnant women having 4+ ANC visits  
Among refugees  
Among host communities 
iii) 
Percent of births in appropriate facilities21 
Among refugees  
Among host community residents 
iv) 
Number of women having at least 1 postpartum visit within 1 week after birth 
Among refugees  
Among host community residents 
v) 
Average facility quality score as assessed by the PBF quality check list22 
 
All service utilization indicators, both at the PDO and intermediate levels, will be monitored separately for 
refugees, host community residents, and women or girls (where meaningful).   
 
B. Project Components 
 
45. 
The project will be financed by a US$14.5 million equivalent IDA credit and a US$5 million equivalent grant 
from WHR. The project will build on lessons learned and scale up the successes of previous and ongoing World 
Bank-supported health operations. The needs of the refugee population are similar to those of the overall 
population, and the project will help the government integrate refugee populations into the national health 
system. The scope of the project is nation-wide, with priority given to refugees, host communities, and 
underserved populations living in the five regions and other areas such as Balbala, a suburb of Djibouti City. 
Although the whole country will benefit from the project, all service indicators in the Results Framework include 
a disaggregation by refugees, host community residents as well as gender (where meaningful). The project 
consists of the following three components:  
 
Component 1: Strengthening service delivery platforms (US$16.5 million, of which US$4.25 million from the 
WHR).  
 
46. 
This component includes 3 sub-components:  
 
o Sub-component 1.1: Service delivery optimization: This sub-component refers to the service delivery redesign 
agenda, articulated by The Lancet Global Health Commission on High Quality Health Systems in the 
Sustainable Development Goals Era as, “a reorganization of services within the health system to efficiently 
maximize health outcomes and user confidence, rather than only geographic access to clinics”.23 
Reorganization is expected to and aimed at improving the effective coverage of RMNCAH-N interventions, 
including those for climate change-related conditions such as water-borne and vector-borne diseases as well 
 
20 The definition of “host community” in this project will be Balbala, a suburb of Djibouti City. 
21 Appropriate facilities are defined as facilities either (i) offering Comprehensive Emergency Obstetric and Neonatal Care (CEmONC) or 
(ii) within 5 km of facilities with CEmONC.  
22 For different levels of care, there are different sets of criteria to measure quality (availability of services, hygiene practices, data 
management, etc.). Each facility will be rated on the extent to which criteria are met. 
23 Kruk ME, et al. High-quality health systems in the Sustainable Development Goals era: time for a revolution. Lancet Glob Health. 2018 
Nov;6(11): 1196-1252.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 64  
     
 
as heat stroke. It will focus in particular on the changing needs of the most vulnerable populations such as 
women, children and refugees to help increase their resilience to health risks, including risks related to climate 
and environmental factors. It will support health service delivery optimization in all regions in the country as 
well as Djibouti City, with more intensive support given to (i) Ali Sabieh and Obock, the two regions that are 
home to the three refugee camps, and (ii) Balbala, a host community in a suburb of Djibouti City which hosts 
large numbers of underserved populations, refugees and migrants.  Activities include support for:  
i) 
Development of a national health service optimization plan on the basis of:  
(a) Existing health system assets (including geographic distribution and population 
catchment). 
(b) A modeling exercise using geospatial data to identify the optimal distribution of 
selected services such as CmONC, essential emergency and critical care, and 
certain laboratory services (e.g., GeneXpert). 
(c) A revision of the package of health services by level of care 
(d) The recommendations from the Djibouti Climate and Health Vulnerability 
Assessment (CHVA)24, to identify key risks posed by climate change to the 
Djiboutian health system and identify adaptation and mitigation options 
ii) 
Rehabilitation of health facilities25, particularly hospitals with CEmONC capabilities, according 
to the above-mentioned national health service optimization plan, including repair of flood 
damage; new construction is not envisioned. Rehabilitation construction standards will follow 
CHVA recommendations and will incorporate both adaptation measures (e.g., maximizing 
natural ventilation, minimizing heat exposure in interior and exterior spaces, promoting 
energy savings through smart lighting) as well as mitigation design measures (e.g., 
improvements in facilities’ energy efficiency, such as insulation, use of renewable energy 
sources, such as solar panels, integration of vegetation in waiting spaces and roofs)  
iii) 
Rehabilitation and/or transformation of existing buildings into maternal waiting homes to 
bring pregnant women from remote areas closer to CEmONC facilities, according to the 
service optimization plan, taking into account the CHVA recommendations and reducing 
carbon emissions related to travel by going to regional hospitals closer to their homes instead 
of Djibouti City 
iv) 
Rehabilitation of the CAMME according to service optimization plan, incorporating CHVA 
recommendations 
v) 
Support the supply of essential medicines (following a review of supply chain processes for 
essential medicines and an adoption of a plan to implement its recommendations) and 
medical equipment (including, inter alia, equipment to manage complications during 
labor/childbirth due to FGM, energy-efficient cold chain equipment, using low carbon 
standards or energy star standards as one criterion for choosing suppliers 
vi) 
Improvement of the biomedical waste management system as part of the facility 
rehabilitation and equipment agendas 
vii) 
Provision of solar-powered mobile clinics26 for the five regions and electric/hybrid/hydrogen-
powered buses to reach hard-to-reach populations, such as nomadic groups, which is 
expected to also help reducing the carbon footprint of travels to seek care 
 
24 The CHVA is expected to be completed by June 2022 and this project will be used to implement the recommendations of the CHVA.  
25 Health facility rehabilitation along with rehabilitation of maternal waiting homes and the CAMME is expected to make up 
approximately 85 percent (about US$8.5 million) of the expenditures under Subcomponent 1.1.  
26 The number will depend on the service optimization plan but will most likely be five, one solar-powered mobile clinic per region. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 64  
     
 
viii) 
Development and implementation of a referral and counter-referral strategy; this activity will 
focus on referral systems to match patients with the appropriate level of care to improve 
effective coverage and improve efficiency in the care continuum. Activities include: the 
development and implementation of referral network protocols based on population 
catchment areas with algorithms including climate vulnerability criteria to ensure targeting of 
the most climate vulnerable populations27. Criteria include direct vulnerability to particular 
adverse climate impacts, but also indirect vulnerability reflecting a lowered ability to cope 
with the consequences of such impact. Further activities include enabling the functionality of 
the referral and counter-referral system networks, and support patient transportation 
initiatives (e.g., ambulances for high acuity; vouchers for transport-related costs and/or 
drivers and vehicles for transport for refugees and poor people to and from hospitals for lower 
acuity) 
ix) 
Improving RMNCAH-N workforce, including: 
(a) establishing community of practice and other interventions to build a culture of 
excellence among service providers and improve their work environment 
(b) strengthening pre-service and in-service training in RMNCAH-N, including, inter 
alia, the implementation of CHVA recommendations (e.g., management of vector 
and water-borne conditions), FGM prevention, treatment and reporting, and 
malnutrition 
(c) Clinical mentoring of health workers 
 
o Sub-component 1.2: Supporting the PBF and DFF schemes: PBF at primary, secondary and tertiary levels, and 
DFF pilot in two regions at primary level. This subcomponent will support the national PBF scheme started 
under the PAPSS project which pays for quantity and quality of services in primary, secondary, and tertiary 
public health facilities. Further refinements will be made to the PBF design, including:  
i) 
revision of performance-based indicators, both quantity and quality, centering the design 
to inter alia include interventions to address stunting as well as water- and vector-borne 
conditions (such as malaria and diarrhea) in the payment indicators28 which increased as 
a result of climate change and include climate vulnerability and “green” facility criteria29 
in the PBF quality checklist 
ii) 
revision of the level of incentive payments to health facilities 
iii) 
revision to include provision of free care for specific services (e.g., cesarian sections) for 
refugees and poor people at secondary and tertiary level of care 
iv) 
result verification and counter-verification mechanisms 
v) 
revision of the spending rules for PBF income by facilities 
vi) 
possible performance-based contracting of private facilities 
vii) peer learning and operational research in PBF.  
 
 
27 The most climate vulnerable populations include refugees (including climate refugees from neighboring countries), poor people living 
in poor living conditions in urban areas such as Balbala, a suburb of Djibouti City, poor people living in rural areas in traditional homes. 
28 Interventions addressing water- and vector-borne conditions will account for roughly 10 percent (about US$500,000) of the PBF 
payment formula.  
29 “Green facility criteria” will include inter alia efficient use of energy, use of renewable resources (e.g., solar), improved waste 
management, good indoor air quality and ventilation, green spaces/green roofs – roughly 20 percent (about US$1 million) of the PBF 
payment formula. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 64  
     
 
47. 
The PBF revision will also be in the context of the on-going dialogue on PBF sustainability, including 
domestic resource mobilization for PBF. In addition, a DFF scheme will be introduced as a pilot in two regions, one 
in the north and another in the south. DFF will only include primary healthcare facilities and will provide additional 
non-salary operating budget to participating facilities.   
 
o Sub-component 1.3: Supporting the community health platform. This sub-component supports the MOH in 
the development and rollout of a community health worker program to deliver a comprehensive community 
health package. Activities will include support for: 
i) 
Development of a national community health strategy that will define a community health service 
package. Such a package, which will include social and behavior change communication (SBCC) and 
other health interventions, will inter alia integrate the CHVA recommendations in (a) improving 
nutrition and WASH practices and prevention and treatment of vector- and water-borne conditions, 
and (b) increasing the communities’ adaptive capacity to protect themselves from rising 
temperatures, floods and other risks related to climate change. The package will also reinforce the 
referral system, prevention of and care for victims of FGM, and information for refugees and others 
of their entitlements to free health services 
ii) 
The implementation of the community health strategy. These include training (e.g., on topics such as 
climate resilience30, nutrition, and legal literacy on FGM), equipment (including digital job aids), travel 
assistance for community health workers; The project will also link community health workers to 
other existing training and certification programs 
iii) 
Support an embedded learning agenda for evidence-based policy: studies to inform decision making 
 
Component 2: Strengthening institutions, citizen engagement and project management (US$3 million, of which 
US$0.75 million from the WHR).  
 
48. 
The second component aims to strengthen the government’s capacity to implement and coordinate 
programs, within the MOH, across other ministries and agencies on cross-sectoral issues (e.g., stunting, FGM, 
refugees, climate), and between the central government and regional hospitals. 
o Sub-component 2.1: Strengthening institutions: This sub-component will provide technical assistance (TA) and 
capacity building for various institutions which are critical to RMNCAH-N, including, inter alia: 
i) 
Various MOH departments for the development and implementation of relevant sector policies, 
strategies, regulations (including regulating and engaging private sector in health), standards, 
protocols, guidelines, and plans related to RMNCAH-N, PHC, quality of care, pandemic preparedness 
and response, digitalization and e-health strategy, integration of refugees into the national health 
system, human resources for health, review of supply chain efficiency and controls to improve 
efficiency, prevention of the medicalization of FGM, health care waste management, “green” facilities 
and climate change mitigation and adaptation measures, emergency preparedness and response, 
including climate-change induced or exacerbated natural disasters and pandemics/epidemics. TA will 
also address high-leverage initiatives including the rollout of DHIS2 (which will disaggregate services 
by patients’ refugee status), development of and rollout of the national Logistics Management 
Information System (eLMIS), and activation and operationalization of a national nutrition surveillance 
system; TA will also resolve bottlenecks preventing refugees from receiving free services to which 
they are entitled 
 
30 Topics on climate resilience will include preventive behavior and recognition of warning signs around water- and vector-borne diseases 
exacerbated by climate change, multi-risk contingency planning and disease surveillance and response. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 64  
     
 
ii) 
CRVS activities within the health sector, periodic surveys, purposeful quality of care monitoring at 
facility level, other M&E/data initiatives and operational research, integrated health/environmental 
surveillance system to monitor climate related diseases, facilitation of refugees’ access to the national 
health system 
iii) 
Regional health management teams: strengthening their management and technical capacity to help 
them better carry out their mandates in the context of health decentralization, including training in 
“green” facilities and climate change adaptations (e.g., limiting exposure to extreme heat) 
 
o Sub-component 2.2 Social mobilization for health: This sub-component will support positive behavior change 
for better health, help ignite people’s demand for better services and amplify people’s voices by financing: 
(i) 
Supplies for maternal waiting homes, alongside a transport voucher scheme for 
expectant mothers and other patients, to facilitate giving birth in or near facilities with 
CEmONC capabilities. Transport vouchers and cash support for incidentals will be 
provided to refugees and very poor individuals with select conditions, especially for 
chronic and complex conditions 
(ii) 
The recruitment of a firm/organization to implement integrated SBCC campaigns, 
including topics on the medical risks of FGM, climate-related mitigation and adaptation 
and other recommendations from the CHVA at national, regional, and facility levels 
(including in refugee villages) 
(iii) 
Implementation of social accountability and transparency mechanisms such as: 
a) “Community scorecards” linked to counter-verification of PBF activities at the 
facility comparing and measuring a community’s progress in achieving higher 
standards, including on climate vulnerability and adaptation 
b) Patient charters, service standard displays at health facilities, etc. 
c) Initiatives on citizen engagement and empowerment to usher in a social 
movement in health, including an annual Regional Health Forum of all relevant 
stakeholders which channel their findings upward to an Annual National Health 
Forum 
(iv) 
Data systems to create feedback loops from health system users, including on climate 
vulnerability/sensitivity, using ongoing user-experience surveys; the integration of user 
experience data into administrative systems’ facility self-evaluations to inform and 
influence decision makers 
(v) 
Grievance redress mechanism at different levels. 
 
o Sub-component 2.3: Project management – This subcomponent will support project management, including 
project M&E. 
 
Component 3: Contingent Emergency Response Component - CERC (US$0 million).  
 
49. 
This contingent emergency response component is included under the project in accordance with World 
Bank’s Investment Project Financing Policy, paragraphs 12, for situations of urgent need of assistance. This will 
allow for rapid reallocation of project proceeds in the event of a natural or man-made disaster or health outbreak 
or crisis that has caused or is likely to imminently cause a major adverse economic and/or social impact.  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 64  
     
 
50. 
To trigger this component the government needs to declare an emergency or provide a statement of fact 
justifying the request for the activation of the use of emergency funding. To allocate funds to this component the 
government may request the World Bank to re-allocate project funds to support emergency response and early 
recovery.  
 
51. 
If the WBG agrees with the determination of the disaster or health emergency, and associated response 
needs, this component would draw resources from the unallocated expenditure category and/or allow the 
government to request the World Bank to re-categorize and reallocate financing from other project components 
to cover emergency response and recovery costs. This component could also be used to channel additional funds 
should they become available as a result of an emergency.  
 
52. 
Disbursements would be made against an approved list of critical goods, services and works required to 
support the immediate response and recovery needs. A CERC Operations Manual will be prepared as an annex to 
the Project’s Operation Manual outlining triggers for its activation and detailing fiduciary, safeguards and any 
other necessary implementation arrangements.  
 
 
 
Table 4: Summary of health system challenges and interventions 
Challenges 
Interventions Under the Project 
Demand-side  
Low health literacy, unfavorable health practices, 
lack of social movement for health  
• 
Community health platform  
• 
SBCC campaign to improve health 
practices  
• 
Local and nation health assemblies as 
well as other citizen/patient engagement 
 
Supply-side 
Sub-optimal network of care, especially for 
underserved areas, refugees, and host 
communities 
Service delivery redesign: 
• 
Optimization plan to improve care 
network  
• 
Facility rehabilitation on basis of plan  
• 
Provision of equipment on basis of plan 
(including healthcare waste 
management) 
• 
Strengthening of the referral mechanism 
• 
Mobile clinics/buses for outreach 
• 
Facilitation of refugees’ access to the 
national health system 
Human Resources for Health constraints 
• 
Pre-service and in-service training 
• 
TA for development and implementation 
of HRH strategy to build a culture of 
excellence 
Weak accountability and motivation for results 
• 
PBF 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 64  
     
 
Inadequate inputs (esp. operating costs) for 
health facilities 
• 
PBF, DFF (at primary level in two regions) 
Inadequate data for real-time decision making 
• 
DHIS2, CRVS, other surveys and data 
initiatives 
Limited institutional capacity 
• 
Strengthening institutional capacity of 
the MOH and other key entities to 
enhance their stewardship 
 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
 
53. 
The project will benefit the population of the whole country indirectly through health system 
strengthening, service delivery optimization, improved health infrastructure, investments in community health 
platforms, and SBCC. Direct beneficiaries of the project are women of childbearing age, adolescent and pre-
pubescent girls, newborns and children under five years of age, both among nationals and refugees. Table 5 
summarizes the estimated number of direct beneficiaries over the project’s implementation timeline. The 
numbers in each column estimate the total number of individuals that will receive RMNCAH-N services that year. 
The estimated number of registered refugees and asylum seekers receiving services could be on the conservative 
side, if this number increases due to a possible continuation of the conflict in neighboring Ethiopia despite the 
declared truce on March 24, 2022. These estimates do not take into account migrants and therefore 
underestimate the total number of direct beneficiaries. The numbers of pre-pubescent and adolescent girls 
estimate the direct beneficiaries for counseling and prevention of FGM. The project will benefit health personnel, 
notably doctors, nurses, nutritionists, and midwives, and CHWs from training on RMNCAH, nutrition, FGM, and 
management of climate related health issues. The project will also benefit management at all levels of the health 
sector, including the MOH, regions, and facility level. Various technical cadres will benefit from training to 
operationalize and sustain the new models of service delivery and tools. 
 
Table 5: Estimated number of target beneficiaries over the project’s timeline31 
 
Project Implementation Timeline 
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Year 4 
Year 5 
Total  
Year  
2022-23 
2023-24 
2024-25 
2025-26 
2026-27 5 years 
Number of women receiving RMNCAH services 
58604 
59483 
60375 
61281 
62200 301943 
Number of children under 5 
98963 
100447 
101954 
103483 
105035 509882 
Number of girls aged 10-15 
49837 
50584 
51343 
52113 
52895 256772 
Number of Refugees receiving services 
(women receiving RMNCAH services and 
children receiving routine services) 
15438 
16334 
17281 
18284 
19344 86681 
Number of host community individuals 
receiving services (women receiving RMNCAH 
70529 
73771 
77460 
81333 
85400 388223 
 
31 This table estimates the total number of individuals visiting health facilities in a given year. Projections are made using trends of 
changes in refugee population from past years and assume at least one visit for women of reproductive age and young children 
adolescents per year. In reality, each individual is expected to use services more than once per annum. Population growth rate is 1.5 
percent.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 64  
     
 
services and children receiving routine 
services)32 
D. Results Chain 
 
54. 
The main assumption underpinning the project’s theory of change is that optimization of service 
delivery is essential to elevate Djibouti’s health system performance in line with its lower middle-income status. 
In other words, the assumption is that service delivery redesign, coupled with improved demand for health 
services, and improved management and accountability will substantively improve the utilization of quality 
RMNCAH-N services and will strengthen the health system. These two project outcomes will contribute to 
reducing maternal and under-five mortality in the country (Figure 7). More specifically, the following 
outputs/intermediate results are a prerequisite to the project meeting its PDO: 
i) 
Improved and climate-resilient health infrastructure 
ii) 
Improved availability of essential drugs, commodities, and energy efficient equipment 
iii) 
Improved knowledge, skills and motivation of health staff 
iv) 
Community engagement and commitment to changing standards, including abandonment of 
harmful practices such as FGM 
v) 
Better quality of care 
vi) 
Increase in demand for higher quality services at appropriate levels of care 
vii) 
Improved access of care at appropriate levels, including for refugees and poor people 
viii) 
Better governance, management and transparency, including at regional levels 
ix) 
Government’s increased ability to design, implement and coordinate projects. 
 
 
32 These numbers are for Balbala, a suburb of Djibouti City, which is the largest host community for refugees in Djibouti and used as the 
definition of “host community” for this project. This is a lower limit estimate for host community, as in reality refugees live in many other 
urban and rural areas of the country. Estimates are for 30 percent of Balbala’s population of 223,043 (2021). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 64  
     
 
Figure 7: Theory of Change33   
 
 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
 
55. 
The provision of health services and investment in health system strengthening targeted towards the 
poor and vulnerable are part of public sector mandates. This is particularly important in an environment where 
there is a lack of a well-performing health system. Improvements in the demand and provision of care, notably 
through community platforms and information awareness can help mitigate issues of OOPS and informal fees. 
Complementary services interventions in addition to strengthened health systems and quality services, can also 
generate positive externalities on human capital and the economy. Under these circumstances, there is an urgent 
need for public sector interventions to enable its vulnerable populations, including refugees, to cope with health 
risks and their consequences. Interventions aimed at fostering public goods are typically only effective when 
provided uniformly, which is better done through public sector entities that have scope, linkages, and outreach 
across the regions. The private sector in Djibouti is nascent and limited but may benefit from the project (e.g., 
 
33 The inputs, activities and processes, outputs/intermediate results and project outcomes particularly serving the refugee populations 
are the same as the general population. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 of 64  
     
 
possibly through PBF/DFF schemes) and other World Bank financed operations which are supporting the GoD in 
improving business environment and governance of the private sector.  
 
56. 
The World Bank has been supporting the GoD in strengthening its health system and RMNCAH-N 
services using its technical expertise and global knowledge in this area for the past two decades. World Bank-
financed operations as well as its Advisory Services and Analytics (ASAs) have supported the government to 
consolidate, coordinate, and monitor health interventions and service delivery under an increasingly coherent 
policy and institutional framework. The World Bank has been supporting Djibouti in RMNCAH-N-focused projects 
for the past two decades namely through two projects – Health Sector Development Project (HSDP, P071062) and 
PAPSS and has an ongoing operation, Towards Zero Stunting and Responding to COVID-19 and Other Emergencies, 
which is expected to continue to focus on nutrition activities while the new project would strengthen systems, 
service delivery and institutional coordination for tackling cross-sectoral issues such as nutrition and FGM.  
 
57. 
The project complements the existing World Bank-supported portfolio in the health sector. The new 
operation will serve as a key platform for World Bank’s support for strengthening health system capacity and 
elevating its performance to be better aligned with other lower middle-income countries. The new operation will 
have a galvanizing effect in supporting the MOH to implement and coordinate programs, including the 
development of policies, procedures, training, data collection and utilization for decision making that will benefit 
departments across the MOH, including those implementing existing World Bank-financed projects. The project 
will leverage existing activities in nutrition supported by the Towards Zero Stunting and Responding to COVID-19 
and Other Emergencies Project, as well as equipment, innovative delivery mechanisms such as mobile clinics and 
integrate RMNCAH-N messages in communication platforms developed for the Djibouti COVID-19 Response 
Project (P173807), and health system strengthening activities financed by the Japan Policy and Human Resources 
Development Fund grant. The project will also be informed and complement the advisory services and analytics 
underway such as the human capital review and health financing systems assessment.  
 
58. 
Beyond the health sector, the project complements activities across projects being implemented in 
other sectors. Project activities related to the expansion and training of community health workers under Sub-
component 1.3, information awareness and life-skills training on reproductive health and FGM for youth and 
adolescents, and pre-service and in-service training of medical workers under Sub-component 1.1 are closely 
coordinated with the Djibouti Skills Development for Employment Project (P175483), which also has an additional 
focus on refugees and has accessed financing under the IDA19 WHR. For instance, individuals identified to 
undertake community health workers training will be supported under the Djibouti Skills Development for 
Employment Project; linkages for youth getting life-skills training under the Djibouti Skills Development for 
Employment Project and SBCC activities under this project, including topics such as FGM and reproductive health, 
will be coordinated to ensure greater impact. In addition, the project complements activities being undertaken 
under the Integrated Cash Transfer and Human Capital Project (P166220), which also received a grant under the 
Regional Sub-window for Refugees and Host Communities (IDA-18) and aims to extend social protection to both 
refugee and host communities by financing demand-side interventions to improve access to basic services. The 
project also complements activities and incorporates lessons from the Djibouti Integrated Slum Upgrading Project 
(P162901) by placing a greater focus on improving access to health services in poor refugee-dense areas, notably 
the suburb of Balbala. These existing World Bank financed projects strengthen the social contract between 
refugees and GoD via integrated public service and benefit provision accompanied by information on rights and 
responsibilities; the social accountability activities under this project will complement and reinforce the social 
contract. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 of 64  
     
 
 
59. 
Finally, the project fits well within and complements the overall health sector support provided by and 
has benefited from coordination with other development partners. The World Bank is coordinating closely with 
the UNHCR, given the added focus on refugees, to ensure that all activities related to refugees are well 
coordinated and that improving access to health services for refugees is well planned and structured. The World 
Bank is coordinating with the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunizations (GAVI), on issues related to routine 
immunizations, especially as Djibouti enters a five-year phase of accelerated transition (starting in 2022), where 
it increases its share of co-financing annually until it finances the total cost of vaccines. The World Bank is also in 
close dialogue with WHO and UNICEF as key partners working in the health sector in Djibouti on overall sectoral 
issues.  
 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
 
60. 
The design of the project has considered lessons learned in the implementation of previous and ongoing 
health projects. The key lessons are reflected in the design and discussed in this section: 
 
61. 
Lessons learned on health systems strengthening in reducing child and maternal mortality in Djibouti 
2002-2012. The HSDP largely focused on facilities improvement, drug provision, and training of health personnel. 
By project closing in 2012, the HSDP supported the restructuring of the health system. Key lessons learned from 
HSDP included the need for: (i) strong commitment from government to support the improvement of health 
services; (ii) ensuring donor coordination; (iii) World Bank alignment with country priorities; (iv) availability of 
drugs and qualified and motivated medical personnel; (v) functional HMIS.  
 
62. 
Lessons Learned from performance-based financing (PBF)34 2012-2021: Building on the successes of the 
HSDP, the PAPSS project, which spanned the following decade, used PBF to improve the utilization and quality of 
key RMCAH-N services such as immunization, management of childhood illnesses, and treatment of malnutrition, 
prevention of mother to child transmission of HIV/AIDS, and emergency obstetric and neonatal care. In the PNDS 
2020-2024, the government has recognized that PBF has played a strong role in health systems strengthening. 
Several lessons learned emerge from the implementation of PAPSS, some of which are structural, such as the lack 
of human resources, particularly at the regional level. Lessons learned also call for increased capacity building 
both at the facility level and at the decision-making level; bridging the gaps between procurement and 
implementation functions; increased community participation in the oversight and accountability of the medical 
units (e.g., health facilities); and inadequate motivation and regular turnaround of health workers. Preliminary 
evaluation of the implementation of the PBF approach in Djibouti and more specifically at the level of the health 
posts, indicates insufficient progress in both quality and quantity of service, as evidenced by the quality score 
which increased from 19.61 percent in Q3-2014 to 34.18 percent in Q3-2016 and to 43 percent in Q1 of 2021. 
These scores are below the 60 percent which is the acceptable standard after 7 years of PBF implementation.  
 
63. 
Global experience with the design and implementation of the PBF has shown that: (i) it is an effective tool 
for improving quality/efficiency and strategic health procurement; (ii) the most powerful impact is seen in the 
relationship between buyers and suppliers, paving the way for supplier payment reform, quality measurement, 
and accountability for results; and (iii) it tends to be more effective at hospital levels, especially in promoting 
 
34 Since the PAPSS projects closed on November 30, 2021, a more detailed analysis on lessons learned is forthcoming as part of the ICR 
process. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Health System Strengthening (P178033) 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 of 64  
     
 
improvements to quality of care and is often less effective at primary healthcare level. Thus, the new project will 
pilot DFF at the primary facilities in two regions. 
 
64. 
Lessons learned from triple crises - flooding, locust, and COVID-19 in 2019-2020 call for a resilient 
approach. The triple crises in late 2019/2020 and the activation of the CERC under the Zero Stunting project in 
March and April 2020 underscored the need to take a fresh look at the approach for rehabilitating health 
infrastructure under the project and ensure the use of building standards that are climate resilient and with 
capacity to operate using renewable resources, such as solar panels. Furthermore, with unpredictable rainfall, 
which leads to both droughts and floods, the project will have a heightened focus on water and vector-borne 
conditions, such as malaria and diarrhea which happen to be the leading causes of death in the most vulnerable 
populations, such as children and refugees. The experience over the past couple of years also informed the current 
project’s approach in terms of institutional and implementation resiliency and the need to strengthen the MOH’s 
capacity as a whole to implement and coordinate projects and respond to emergencies quickly while not forsaking 
ongoing projects and programs.   
 
65. 
Project design draws on experience of other projects supported by the IDA18 and 19 WHR. Lessons 
learned from previous projects in Djibouti focusing on refugees highlight the need for directly engaging with 
refugee communities. The Integrated Cash Transfer project (P166220) highlights the need to integrate refugees 
into the mainstream, such as through the social registry, to ensure that they can improve human capital 
investments and contribute productively to the community. The Djibouti Integrated Slum Upgrading Project 
(P162901) highlights the need to invest in community level engagement to improve living conditions. This project 
takes that into account by expanding community health workers to engage directly in the refugee communities.

A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
66. 
Consistent with the strategic orientations of the GoD to build capacity of government staff and building 
on World Bank-supported projects’ implementation challenges and lessons learned from the implementation of 
the recently closed PAPSS project and the two on-going projects, Towards Zero Stunting and Responding to COVID-
19 and Other Emergencies, and the COVID-19 Response (P173807), the new project will be implemented within 
the existing institutional structures within the MOH (Figure 9). In addition, based on the lessons from the recently 
completed Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR), the new operation will be coordinated by the Office of 
the Secretary General and overseen by a project steering committee. The Project Management Directorate (DGP) 
will be in charge of the day-t