[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 120000 chars → Filtered: 101035 chars (15.8% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
 
1. 
Djibouti is a small, lower-middle income country with a strategic geopolitical and trade position in the Horn of 
Africa and the Gulf of Aden. Djibouti overcame violent civil conflict in the early 1990s through a negotiated peace and 
power-sharing agreement between the country's main ethnic groups and has since enjoyed a peace dividend with steady 
economic growth made possible by an influx of foreign capital in the transport and logistics sectors, as well as rental 
fees from foreign military bases. The country is located near some of the world's busiest shipping lanes, controlling 
access to the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean. Djibouti serves as a key refuelling, transhipment, and major seaport for 
imports and exports to neighbouring Ethiopia, Somalia and Yemen. As a result, a significant flow of goods passes through 
the port of Djibouti to supply the region, while the Djibouti market alone accounts for only about 2 percent of the total 
flow.  
 
2. 
The combined effects of the war in Ukraine, the COVID-19 pandemic, the conflict in Ethiopia and the current 
drought have led to a deterioration in the country's economic situation, which could worsen further in the coming 
months. Djibouti's economy has been hit hard by the 2020 pandemic, as Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth dropped 
from 5.5 percent in 2019 to 1.2 percent in 2020. The economic recovery that began in the fourth quarter of 2020 and 
continued into the second half of 2021 was dampened by a decline in Ethiopian demand for logistics services in the 
second half of 2021. GDP growth reached 4.8 percent in 2021, 1.5 percentage points below the pre-war level in Ethiopia 
and more than 0.7 percentage points below the pre-pandemic level. Growth is expected to slow to 3.6 percent in 2022, 
due to the impact of the crisis in Ethiopia and the war in Ukraine. This decline in economic activity, combined with the 
severe drought of recent years, directly reduces consumer purchasing power and food availability, threatening the 
country's food and nutrition security. In addition, the current drought is having a serious impact on water availability, 
vegetable and livestock production and, consequently, household incomes in rural areas. 
 
3. 
The multiple crises the country is facing are putting pressure on fiscal and external accounts. The COVID-19 
pandemic and the conflict in neighbouring Ethiopia have already exacerbated fiscal pressures, as total revenue of the 
state fell by 4.1 percent to about 19.4 percent of GDP in 2021 and is expected to decline further in the medium term. In 
addition, while the external debt-to-GDP ratio was declining from 71.2 percent in 2017 to 69.8 percent of GDP in 2019, 
it has rebounded to 75.6 percent in 2020, mainly due to external financing to support the response to COVID-19 and the 
contraction of GDP. Fiscal pressures are likely to emerge in the medium term, due to further tax exemptions to support 
local cooking oil production, and continued pandemic-related tax relief. As a net importer of food and energy, the 
economic consequences of the war in Ukraine are likely to affect Djibouti's external account through higher import bills. 
Rising commodity prices and increasing costs of maritime freight, reflecting tensions in the supply chain, are causing a 
significant worsening of the external current account, which is expected to move from a comfortable surplus in 2020/21 
to a deficit in 2022/23. 
 
4. 
Poverty affects one in six people and is subject to spatial disparities. According to the 2019 poverty assessment, 
based on the 2017 household survey data, 17 percent of the population lived in extreme poverty, with less than US$1.9 
per day (in 2011 purchasing power parity terms). The regional distribution shows that extreme poverty lies at 10 percent 
in Djibouti City, 23 percent in Ali Sabieh, 28 percent in Arta, 35 percent in Obock, 51 percent in Dikhil, and 61 percent in 
Tadjourah. Djibouti's Gini coefficient, estimated at 0.4511 in 2012, rose to 0.416 in 2017. The country was ranked 71st 
 
1 Djibouti Household Survey / Social Indicators (EDAM4-IS). 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 60  
     
 
out of 95 countries in 2015 in terms of inequality. Compared to Djibouti city, where economic activities are 
concentrated, the rest of the country is characterised by marked differences in welfare levels between urban and rural 
areas. For example, in Tadjourah, which has the highest poverty rate, households in the 90th percentile enjoy 
consumption levels 8.2 times higher than those in the 10th percentile. The extreme poverty rate in Djibouti is estimated 
to have increased to 23-30 percent in 2020 (from 15 percent in 2019) due to the pandemic and income losses resulting 
from job losses, price shocks, reduced economic activity, and other factors.  
 
5. 
The war in Ukraine has had a sudden impact on world grain markets and on food, fuel, and fertiliser prices, 
posing major risks to global food and nutrition security. Ukraine and the Russian Federation are major food exporters 
(of grain, especially wheat, and edible oil). The Russian Federation and Belarus are also among the world's largest 
exporters of fertiliser. The sudden halt in exports of these essential commodities has added to the immediate pressures 
on food and nutrition security, particularly for import-dependent countries such as Djibouti. The war has led to 
unprecedented disruptions in exports of grains and edible oils from Ukraine and the Russian Federation, with 
repercussions on shipping logistics beyond the Black Sea region and increases in food prices. By May 2022, the scale of 
current export restrictions had surpassed that of the 2007/2008 food crisis, affecting 17.3 percent of total calories traded 
worldwide. While grain prices eased slightly over the summer, high prices and market disruptions are likely to persist 
due to the uncertainties of the war in Ukraine and could lead to continued market volatility. Impacts will continue to 
unfold as exporters and importers adjust to market supply disruptions and some exporters may slow down or limit 
exports as the crisis continues. These impacts will be felt particularly by small countries, such as Djibouti. 
 
6. 
Djibouti's high vulnerability to climate change poses additional risks to the country's food and nutrition 
security. Djibouti is one of the driest countries in the world and is currently experiencing drought conditions caused by 
rising seasonal temperatures and insufficient rainfall. In 2021, the average temperature recorded in Djibouti reached its 
highest value since 1981, with an increase of about +3.7°C compared to the values recorded during the 1981-2021 
period. Djibouti has experienced exceptionally low rainfall over the past three years. In 2021, rainfall was less than 145 
millimeters in most regions. The lack of rainfall in most of the country in 2021 and the first half of 2022 combined with 
high summer temperatures have greatly increased the degradation of vegetation and pastures and led to a rapid drop 
in the level of water tables in traditional wells and cisterns. In addition, the effects of climate change are expected to 
result in future temperature rises, increased aridity, decreased rainfall, and sea level rise. Rising temperatures are 
expected to reduce soil moisture, surface water, and groundwater reserves and significantly increase desertification. 
The resulting increase in evapotranspiration and decrease in soil moisture is likely to have a negative impact on water 
availability in the country, especially for human use but also for agricultural and livestock activities.2 
 
7. 
Refugees and their host communities are among the most affected by these crises. Djibouti has remained 
relatively peaceful in the unstable Horn of Africa region, but it continues to face security and economic challenges due 
to the war in Ethiopia and the resulting trade shock, increased security, and social spending to cope with COVID-19 and 
the influx of refugees. Djibouti hosts about 35,000 internally displaced people, including over 23,000 refugees and 
11,000 asylum seekers. It has seen an increased influx of refugees and migrants of almost 8 percent since January 2021. 
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
8. 
Djibouti's food security is highly exposed to global risks in international markets (food availability and price 
fluctuations), such as the impacts of the war in Ukraine and the conflict in neighbouring Ethiopia, and to climate 
 
2https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/djibouti#:~:text=Djibouti%20is%20considered%20highly%20vulnerable,precipitation%2C
%20and%20rising%20sea%20levels. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 60  
     
 
change, such as the severe drought that has affected the country in recent years. The war in Ukraine has caused a 
major shock to global food, fuel and fertiliser markets, driving up prices and potentially contributing to a further increase 
in food and nutrition insecurity. Djibouti meets up to 90 percent of its food needs through imports, as domestic 
agricultural and livestock production can only cover 10 percent of its consumption needs. The country depends 
exclusively on imports to meet its domestic demand for wheat and wheat products. While Djibouti's direct imports from 
Ukraine are small, the country imports 60 percent of its wheat flour from Turkey, which buys 74 percent of its wheat 
from the Russian Federation. In March 2022, Turkey partially banned the export of wheat flour as well as several other 
basic foodstuffs, joining other countries that have imposed trade restrictions, which has further disrupted the market. 
Other major countries active in global wheat trade (such as India) have also decided to restrict their exports. The conflict 
in neighbouring Ethiopia has also taken a heavy toll on Djibouti's economy, with effects felt by households through the 
reduction in economic activity linked to the port of Djibouti, the decline in cross-border trade, and food availability, 
leading to higher food prices. In addition, the current drought in the Horn of Africa is having a devastating effect on 
Djibouti's livestock herds and water tables, contributing to the deterioration of the country's food security, particularly 
in rural areas. 
 
9. 
For the first time since 2011, food prices, particularly those of wheat, vegetable oil, fruits and vegetables, 
increased significantly in 2022. In June 2022, Djibouti's Consumer Price Index increased by 6.0 percent compared to the 
previous month, mainly due to an increase in the prices of food and non-alcoholic beverages (Table 1). The general level 
of consumer prices rose by 8.5 percent quarter-on-quarter, and year-on-year inflation was 11.5 percent. Prices for food 
and non-alcoholic beverages rose by 13.1 percent compared to the previous month. In addition, food and non-alcoholic 
beverage prices recorded a 19.7 percent increase quarter-on-quarter and a 25.6 percent increase over the past twelve 
months.  
 
10. 
Rising food prices and potential disruptions to food imports have recently caused concerns among Djibouti’s 
population. Possible food shortages and the sudden surge in food prices in domestic markets have caused people to 
worry about the further deterioration of the country’s food and nutrition security situation. In addition, some bakeries 
have closed because the government has not authorized bread price increases. Inflationary trends have put pressure on 
household welfare as well as on productive sectors and have disproportionately affected the poor and vulnerable. This 
prompted the Government of Djibouti (GoD) not only to immediately seek short-term solutions to manage tensions in 
national food markets but also to put in place a sustainable system that would mitigate the risks of food insecurity.  
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 60  
     
 
 
Table 1: Price increases of food commodities and non-alcoholic beverages since 2020 
 
Source: Institute of Statistics of Djibouti (INSTAD)  
 
11. 
There are six basic food items of strategic importance in Djibouti, namely wheat flour, rice, sugar, pasta, milk 
powder, and vegetable oil. These products account for more than 75 percent of Djiboutians' total daily calorie intake 
(sugar contributes 19 percent, rice 17 percent, wheat flour 16 percent, vegetable oil 15 percent, and pasta 8 percent). 
The country consumes an average of 1,950 tonnes of pasta, 1,250 tonnes of rice, and 2,930 tonnes of sugar per month. 
In Djibouti, sugar represents an integral part of the diet and is a crucial energy source, particularly for rural populations. 
Similarly, pasta and rice are consumed on a daily basis. As these products form a large part of the food basket, the GoD 
exempts private importers from paying value-added tax and import taxes on these products, allowing it to closely 
monitor import prices and, in turn, set price margins for these products to be sold on national markets. Compliance with 
these fixed price margins is regularly monitored by the Ministry of Commerce and Tourism (Ministère du Commerce et 
du Tourisme, MCT).  
 
12. 
The risk of availability shortfalls and price increases of basic food commodities depends on several factors. 
Since the number of global rice exporters is relatively limited, any adverse events in rice-exporting countries could lead 
to shortages and substantial price increases in international markets. Although the number of global producers of wheat 
flour and sugar is large, resulting in a moderate risk of shortages or price volatility for these products, the war in Ukraine 
has shown the potential effect of unforeseen crises on world prices.  Furthermore, extreme climatic events increasing 
in frequency could potentially result in shortages and substantial price increases in the future. As the number of global 
producers of durum wheat, the input for pasta, is relatively limited and only a few specialised trading companies are 
active in the market, availability and price risks can be considered high. The market for milk powder has a moderate risk 
of shortage, but price risks could be considered high due to the high costs of changing the production process and the 
potential reluctance of producers to switch from high value-added production (fresh dairy products) to lower value-
added dairy products, such as milk powder.  
 
13. 
Despite the country's heavy dependence on global food markets, the GoD has no system for monitoring global 
food trade trends and assessing the availability of key commodities in national markets. This makes it difficult for the 
government to predict food shortages and formulate a rapid response to potential food crises. While the MCT collects 
monthly food price and consumption data for the national market, there is an urgent need for a systematic analysis of 
international agricultural commodity markets and reference markets, including futures and spot markets and related 
data (processing costs, ocean freight). A dedicated database on these markets and adequate analytical models are 
needed to support risk management approaches. In addition, a detailed analysis of the domestic market is required, 
including monitoring of private stocks to assess the risk of food shortages.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 60  
     
 
 
14. 
Food trade is fully liberalised, with imports, storage and distribution managed entirely by the private sector. 
There is a network of local wholesalers, semi-wholesalers, and retailers involved in the full cycle of trade, most of whom 
rent or own storage facilities. The country has good storage facilities, although their quality varies between operators, 
with occasional risks of flooding. The maximum storage time for food products varies according to product type, but 
wheat flour is currently only stored for one month due to unfavourable storage and climatic conditions. 
 
15. 
Djibouti's food security is highly exposed to risks related to climate change and adverse weather events, 
including drought, which has serious implications for water availability, livestock and vegetable production and, 
consequently, household incomes. On February 13, 2021, the GoD in collaboration with the Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO), issued a drought alert for the country, indicating critically low groundwater levels and deterioration 
of vegetation and pastures due to the lack of rainfall over the past three years and record temperatures. The reduction 
in water availability has already resulted in the drying up of water points (cisterns, open reservoirs, wadis, etc.) and a 
filling rate of wells below 50 percent of the level considered normal for Djibouti. In addition, many water points need 
repair, which is generally hampered by the lack of necessary equipment. Vegetable crops have been affected by the lack 
of water, forcing most farmers to reduce their plots this year. Djibouti's livestock resources are important (mainly goats 
and sheep), as about 60 percent of the population depends on them as a source of livelihood. There are an estimated 
one million sheep and goats and 300,000 cattle in the country.3 According to the April 2022 edition of the Food Security 
and Nutrition Monitoring System (FSNMS) report conducted by the World Food Programme (WFP) and the National 
Statistics Institute of Djibouti (Institut National de la Statistique de Djibouti, INSD), drought is the main shock 
experienced by households in rural areas (Figure 1).4 The drought in rural areas has impacted agricultural and pastoral 
livelihoods across the country, and 22 percent of rural households reported that the number of livestock they currently 
own has decreased compared to the same period last year5. This is a serious concern, as livestock are the main asset of 
the poorest segment of the population, and an indicator of negative coping strategies.  
 
16. 
The country has weak institutional capacity to manage food security risks, including climate risks. There is no 
early warning system for food supply shortages or adverse weather events, which significantly compromises Djibouti's 
ability to respond to pre-crisis signals. There is no national contingency plan that would allow for a concerted response 
by local and international institutions in the event of adverse events to the country's food security situation. The 
expected increase of extreme weather events in the country (drought, but also flash floods) requires an improvement 
in the country’s capacity to manage these risks, in particular through the establishment of an effective forecasting and 
management system. On the other hand, the country has a National Solidarity Fund to deal with unforeseen events 
affecting the population; the management of this Fund is supervised by an Inter-ministerial Committee placed under 
the authority of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Solidarity (Ministère des Affaires Sociales et des Solidarités, MASS). 
 
 
 
 
3 IGAD, April 2022 
https://www.igad.int/programs/95-icpald/1342-validation-of-djibouti-livestock-development-fund-ldf-report-undertaken#:~:text= 
Djibouti'spourcent20livestockpourcent20resourcespourcent20arepourcent20important,300pourcent2C000pourcent20cattlepourcent20inpource
nt20thepourcent20country 
4 In March 2022, the Ministry of Agriculture, together with the FAO, prepared an assessment report on the current drought and a short-term action 
plan to address it. 
5 WFP, Drought Impact in Djibouti, Issue 1, dated 3 March 2022. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 60  
     
 
Figure 1: Shocks experienced by households in the last six months (in February 2022) 
 
 
 
17. 
The combined effects of market disruptions, rising prices, and drought are negatively impacting consumers' 
purchasing power and consequently reducing their economic access to food, further threatening the country's food 
and nutrition security. International market disruptions, inflation, and rising food prices, coupled with reduced incomes 
due to lower agricultural and livestock production and productivity, and reduced economic activity, will strongly affect 
Djibouti's poorest population, who spend on average 77 percent of their income on food6. The April 2022 edition of the 
Djibouti FSNMS report reveals that in February 2022, the number of people facing severe and moderate food insecurity 
in rural areas increased by 10 percent compared to January 2020. Moderate and severe food insecurity currently affects 
37.1 percent of the rural population and 9.7 percent of urban dwellers in the five regions, or about 124,359 people. The 
latest  Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) Analysis (which does not take into account the effects of the 
war in Ukraine) estimates that the number of people in crisis or worse food insecure (IPC3+) will increase from 131,997 
(127,074 in the IPC3 and 4,923 in the IPC4) to 192,189, or 16 percent of the total population, between July and December 
2022 - of which 179,799 will be in  IPC3 (15 percent of the population) and 12,390  in the IPC4 (1 percent of the 
population). Due to the war in Ukraine, even more people are expected to be in IPC3+ conditions in Djibouti.  
 
18. 
The GoD's Vision 2035 recognizes the importance of a long-term, development-oriented approach to ensuring 
the food and nutrition security of Djibouti’s population. In this strategy, the GoD stresses the importance of ensuring 
the availability of food for its population in order to guarantee the country's food and nutrition security and also notes 
the importance of the role of the private sector in this context. The MASS has been assigned to coordinate the country's 
response to the food security crisis. The proposed Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (Projet d’urgence 
en réponse à la sécurité alimentaire à Djibouti, EFSCRP/PURCSA) aims to: (i) build up a small physical stock of some basic 
food commodities and establish a food shortage preparedness fund, rightsized to avoid hoarding but sufficient to ensure 
the availability of basic food items in a context of market and shipping disruptions; (ii) provide support to drought-
affected households, including farmers and pastoralists, to improve their access to water, restore their livelihoods and 
build their resilience to climatic calamities; and (iii) strengthen Djibouti's capacity to address food insecurity risks 
through the establishment of monitoring and management structures, as well as training of public sector and private 
partners.  
 
6 https://www.wfpusa.org/countries/djibouti/ 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 60  
     
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
 
19. 
The project is fully aligned with the World Bank Group's (WBG) Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY 
2022-2026 discussed by the Board of Directors on September 23, 2021, which recognizes the need for the WBG to 
remain flexible and adapt to events in a region experiencing volatility. Responding to the impending food security crisis 
in Djibouti is aligned with the CPF's focus on strengthening basic services to improve access, quality, and inclusion, while 
increasing resilience to climate change and natural disasters. The CPF is fully aligned with the GoD's medium-term 
strategy, entitled "Institutions - - Connectivity - Inclusion" for the period 2020-2024, which constitutes the second phase 
of the implementation of the Vision 2035 for Djibouti. This strategy aims to support post-pandemic recovery by: (i) 
strengthening public institutions to improve service delivery and macroeconomic stability; (ii) implementing structural 
reforms to improve connectivity and leverage regional integration in the areas of logistics, water, energy, 
telecoms/information and communication technology and transport; and (iii) reinforcing social and economic inclusion. 
 
20. 
The project is aligned with the WBG's comprehensive approach on addressing the global food security crisis 
that stems from the war in Ukraine. It is consistent with the " World Bank Group Response to the Global Impacts of the 
War in Ukraine - Proposed Roadmap" of April 12, 2022, particularly with regard to the proposed short-term response to 
support populations affected by the impacts of the war, including increases in food and fuel prices, and other economic 
and social impacts. In addition, the World Bank's criteria for financing of food imports were applied to the project, as 
outlined in the description below. 
 
21. 
The project supports the GoD's response to the multiple crises in the country. Following concerns about rising 
global food and fuel prices and the effects of the drought in the Horn of Africa, the government outlined a national 
action plan on March 24, 2022 to "save the country from the negative economic repercussions of the current 
international crisis caused by the war between Russia and Ukraine". The plan aims to protect the Djiboutian population 
from soaring prices, in particular for basic necessities, and to guarantee the acquisition of kerosene and diesel.  
 
22. 
The project complements the Emergency Social Protection Crisis Response Project (SPECRP, P178992), 
approved in June 2022. The SPECRP, which is financed by the IDA19 Crisis Response Window Early Response Financing 
(CRW ERF) window, aims to provide cash transfers to targeted households through safety net transfers7 and to 
strengthen adaptive social protection mechanisms to respond to future crises. As required by the CRW-ERF, the GoD 
will be preparing a Food Security Crisis Preparedness Plan, and it is in the early stages of its preparation8. The EFSCRP 
complements the Bank's support to the GoD with an allocation of US$20 million from the IDA20 CRW-ERF window. The 
EFSCRP is prepared in accordance with Section III, paragraph 12 of the Bank's policy: Investment Project Financing (IPF 
Situations in Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints), including the application of abbreviated procedures 
and deferred publication of Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) instruments at the project implementation stage. 
The rationale for processing the EFSCRP under condensed procedures is the urgent need for assistance to address the 
deteriorating food security situation in Djibouti due to the combination of factors that are: (a) disruptions in the food 
supply chain arising from the war in Ukraine and their impact on the global food price increases; and (b) the severe 
drought affecting access to water and livelihoods of vulnerable rural households. 
 
23. 
The project supports Djibouti's climate and development objectives in line with its Paris climate commitments 
and the WBG's climate change action plan for the fiscal years 2021-2025. Djibouti submitted its Nationally Determined 
 
7 Djibouti has an operational safety net system under the responsibility of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Solidarity, which is currently aiming to 
progressively provide national coverage for the country's poorest and most vulnerable population. 
8 EFSCRP indicates the same requirement, with only one action plan to be prepared. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 60  
     
 
Contribution (NDC) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 2016, to support the 
country's efforts to achieve its economic development goals, reduce vulnerability to drought, protect the country from 
rising sea levels, improve access to water, protect biodiversity and build resilience among rural populations. Adverse 
regional events have exacerbated the influx of refugees from the region into Djibouti, putting additional pressure on the 
country's fragile natural resources, and increasing vulnerabilities to climate change. The project activities will support 
Djibouti’s adaptation efforts by establishing mechanisms to address the impact of climate change on food security 
through: (a) the creation of the Emergency Food Stock and Food Shortage Preparedness Fund under Component 1; and 
(b) strengthening the country's resilience to drought under Component 2. 
 
Gender 
 
24. 
The project will pay particular attention to reducing gender gaps that exist in decision-making structures and 
livestock ownership. For the distribution of livestock and inputs the Ministry of Agriculture, Water, Fisheries and 
Livestock, in charge of Halieutic Resources (Ministère de l'Agriculture, de l'Eau, de la Pêche et de l'Elevage, chargé des 
Ressources Halieutiques, MAEPE-RH) will establish regional committees in each of the five regions. These committees 
will be chaired by the President of the Regional Council or his/her representative and will include representatives of the 
prefecture, sub-prefecture, communities, civil society, women's associations, and the sub-directorates of the MAEPE-
RH. An appropriate mechanism will cover the peri-urban area of Djibouti City. An appropriate mechanism will cover the 
peri-urban area of Djibouti City. They will be chaired by the President of the Regional Council or his/her representative 
and will include representatives of the prefecture, sub-prefecture, communities, civil society, women's associations and 
the sub-directorates of the MAEPE-RH. In general, social and religious barriers result in low participation of women in 
these regional committees, currently lying at around 10 percent. Since these regional committees will be responsible 
for validating the list of beneficiaries and of inputs distributed to each beneficiary, the absence of women reflects a 
significant exclusion of women from the decision-making process9. To reduce the gender gap in decision-making over 
resources and representation in decision-making bodies, the project will aim that in the regional committees set up by 
the project at least 30 percent of the members are women. Such representation should result in a more equitable 
distribution of agricultural inputs and livestock and ultimately in better living conditions for women. In addition, the 
project will aim at having a minimum of 30 percent female members in the other committees involved in the 
implementation of the project. This specific activity will be measured by a dedicated results indicator "Percentage of 
women in regional committees." 
 
25. 
Livestock and production losses are generally felt more acutely by women. The ownership of small ruminants 
(sheep and goats) in Djibouti is unequally distributed. In addition, livestock and production losses are generally affecting 
women stronger than men and there is a gender disparity in the ability to recover from shocks and remain a livestock 
owner in Djibouti. The project aims to distribute 10,000 small ruminants (goats, sheep) to 2,000 households. To help 
reduce the aforementioned gender disparity, the project will ensure that 60 percent (6,000 heads) of animals distributed 
will be distributed to women-headed households (defined as single, divorced, widowed, abandoned, or taking care of 
their handicapped husband). This specific activity will be measured by a dedicated results indicator “Number of small 
ruminants received by female-headed households.” 
 
 
 
 
 
9 Data from the Community Rural Development and Water Mobilisation Project (PRODERMO, P117355) and the Locust Emergency Response 
Project (PROLUC, P173702). Based on lessons learned in Djibouti, setting quotas in regional committees has increased women's participation. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 60  
     
 
Citizen Engagement 
 
26. 
The project will deploy a range of citizen engagement mechanisms throughout implementation to ensure that 
beneficiaries can provide input and feedback on the project's processes, progress, and results. The project will conduct 
in-depth consultations with beneficiaries in the five regions and in the peri-urban area of Djibouti City, before, during 
and after the activity implementation through regional committees that represent inclusive platforms (including civil 
society) for local decision-making on the distribution of assets and of agricultural and livestock inputs. At least two 
rounds of qualitative interviews will be conducted before and during the implementation of the project by each regional 
committee with the aim of receiving feedback from beneficiaries on their specific needs and their satisfaction with 
project activities. The results will be used to generate action plans with an implementation schedule that will allow for 
a follow-up on the feedback provided by beneficiaries and the solutions provided. In addition, the project will conduct: 
(i) an initial survey of the targeted rural populations to establish the baseline of their agricultural assets as well as their 
access to water and inputs; and (ii) a final survey on beneficiaries' satisfaction with project support. The beneficiaries 
benefiting from training will be systematically asked to report their level of satisfaction. In addition, the populations will 
be able to address their questions, suggestions, and possible complaints through the grievance mechanism established 
by the project (see section V).

A. Project Development Objective 
 
 PDO Statement 
 
27. 
The development objective of the project is to contribute to mitigating food security risks posed by food 
supply shocks and drought. 
 
 PDO Level Indicators 
 
28. 
The PDO level indicators are: 
● 
Market Analysis Unit established and reporting on monthly basis (number of monthly reports); 
● 
Emergency food stock procured and replenished (number of metric tons of food stored) 
● 
Affected households supported with improved water infrastructures to restore livelihoods (number of 
households); 
● 
Affected households supported with animals, and/or agricultural inputs and/or livestock inputs to restore 
livelihoods (number of households). 
 
B. Project Components 
 
29. 
The following key filters and criteria have been applied to the design of the project, taking into account the 
exceptional nature of the Bank's proposed emergency response in the context of the multiple crises that Djibouti is 
currently facing:  
 
● The country has experienced a significant disruption to food supply. Djibouti has experienced sharp increases 
in the prices of basic food commodities due to the combination of the war in Ukraine, the conflict in 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 60  
     
 
neighbouring Ethiopia, and the drought, which has led to growing concerns among the population over 
possible food shortages. Therefore, the GoD seeks to ensure the availability of a minimum level of basic food 
commodities in the country as one of the instruments to strengthen its capacity to withstand future food 
supply shocks. The project will not include retroactive financing. 
 
● The project intends only to establish foods stocks at minimum required levels. The emergency stock of basic 
food commodities will be established at the strict minimum level corresponding to one month of 
consumption. This will allow the country to fill eventual food shortages and thus minimize the socio-economic 
impacts of related import disruptions, mitigate potential price increases and ensure food security in the short 
term.  
 
● The project has a reasonable likelihood of ensuring access to food on affordable terms to the most 
vulnerable. Should a food security crisis occur and the decision for the release of the emergency food stock 
be taken, a part of the food reserve will be used for humanitarian purposes to be distributed (according to 
MASS criteria) directly to the poorest and most vulnerable, including refugees. The remainder of the food 
reserve will ensure the availability of commodities more broadly on the domestic market. The resulting 
mitigation of price increases will have a particularly positive effect on the poorest and most vulnerable, who 
spend on average 77 percent of their income on food. This project will complement the activities implemented 
by SPECRP (P178992). 
 
● Adequate measures will be put in place to address fiduciary/corruption risk and optimize efficiency. Food 
procurement under the project will be carried out in full compliance with the Bank's procurement rules and 
the financial management of the project will be audited. The purchase of the initial stock of the basic food 
commodities will be phased over the first six months of project implementation; the proceeds from the sale 
of food commodities will be deposited in a dedicated account opened at a commercial bank and will be used 
according to the country's public finance procedures to replenish the emergency food stock. The proper 
supervision of the emergency food stock will be ensured by the Food Stock and Fund Management Unit (FFU), 
which will be responsible for the implementation of a comprehensive stock verification, release and 
replenishment mechanism. A specific Food Stock and Fund Management Manual (FFM) will detail the 
operational mechanisms for stock management, as well as for initiating and monitoring the distribution of 
food to wholesalers and retailers in a crisis. The project will then conduct independent market surveys to 
verify the availability of products in retailers' shops. The MASS will put in place formal procedures for the 
settlement of complaints. 
 
● Close coordination with partners. The project will be closely coordinated with the activities of other technical 
and financial partners, in particular with the WFP for the distribution of food to the poorest and most 
vulnerable population, and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for the establishment of the drought warning system. 
 
● Strengthening preparedness and resilience to food crises. The project includes significant public and private 
sector capacity building and technical assistance to improve the country's resilience to future supply shocks. 
This includes: (i) strengthening the capacity of the government to anticipate food crises and provide a rapid 
response, including the management of an emergency food stock; and (ii) developing the skills of both the 
public and private sectors on price risk management. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 60  
     
 
30. 
The project aims to help the GoD mitigate the multiple food security risks the country is currently facing. In 
particular, the project aims to mitigate not only risks related to food supply shocks and price volatility but also risks 
related to climate change, including drought. It provides a short-term emergency response, such as the creation of an 
emergency food stock and support to drought-affected agricultural producers and livestock herders, but also supports 
longer-term measures aimed at ensuring strategic market and climate analysis and promoting food production and 
income generation in rural areas. The activities proposed in the project are therefore intended to be mutually 
reinforcing. The project will be funded by a US$20 million grant from CRW-ERF and implemented over a three-year 
period. The project will include the following three components: 
 
31. 
Component 1: Mitigating food security risks posed by food supply shocks (US$13.5 million). The objective of 
this component is to establish a system that would enable the GoD to mitigate risks related to food supply shocks in the 
future. The project will finance: (a) capacity strengthening for risk management, through the (i) establishment and 
capacity building of the MAU; and (ii) capacity building of the public and private sectors on market efficiency, price risk 
management and related areas; (b) the establishment of an emergency food stock, through the (i) constitution of a small 
buffer stock (equivalent to approximately one month of consumption); and (ii) establishment and capacity building of 
the FFU; and (c) the establishment of a Food Shortage Preparedness Fund (FPF) for the purchase of basic food 
commodities to complement the emergency food stock. 
 
32. 
Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening capacity for risk management (US$1 million). The project will support: (a) 
the establishment, training, equipment, and staffing of the MAU at the MCT to anticipate and report on potential food 
supply shocks and (b) capacity building of the public and private sectors on market efficiency, price risk management 
and related areas and techniques. The MAU will be trained in local and international market analysis to understand and 
report on pre-crisis signals and will be housed at the MCT. The training will equally include price management risks (price 
hikes) driven by climate change and its impacts. It will exchange regularly with the private sector, and particularly with 
the Chamber of Commerce, on market trends and conditions, the status of national stocks and other relevant 
information and will integrate these considerations in its analyses. This analysis will enable the GoD to respond to crises 
ahead of time and thus contribute to building the country's resilience to market and climate-related risks. The MAU will 
report its findings and recommendations to the Project Steering Committee (PSC). Based on its analysis and predefined 
triggers, the MAU will advise the PSC on the partial or total release of the emergency food stock (see sub-component 
1.2), as well as on the use of the Food Shortage Preparedness Fund (see sub-component 1.3). By the project’s mid-term 
review, a more sustainable reporting arrangement to be followed by the MAU after project closure will be identified, 
including potentially through the National Solidarity Fund under the authority of the MASS. This mechanism will be put 
in place by the end of project implementation. 
 
33. 
This sub-component also aims to: (i) provide training to the public sector on market efficiency analysis, including 
price transmission, market power, and potential collusion, as well as instruments and strategies for managing and 
monitoring price risks (related to climate change, conflict, pandemics, etc.); and (ii) develop private sector skills in price 
management to reduce domestic price volatility and limit price increases (related to climate change, conflict, pandemics, 
etc.), in close collaboration with the Chamber of Commerce. 
 
34. 
Sub-component 1.2: Establishing an emergency food stock (US$7.5 million). This sub-component will (a) 
support the establishment of an emergency food stock which will allow the GoD to respond to potential food shortages 
and reduce the negative effects of these shortages and their direct impact on the poorest; and (b) support the 
establishment, training, equipment and staffing of, and provide technical assistance to the FFU at the MASS. The 
emergency food stock will focus on selected basic food commodities in Djibouti. Regarding the emergency food stock 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 60  
     
 
(see (a) above) the following activities will be financed: (i) the purchase of basic food products including rice (1,250 
tonnes), pasta (1,950 tonnes) and sugar (500 tonnes)10, to cover consumption needs equivalent to approximately one 
month of rice and pasta and approximately one week for sugar; and (ii) transport, storage, rotation and distribution 
costs, incl. related insurance costs, of the purchased commodities until they are sold to the private sector by the GoD 
or, as necessary, partially distributed to the poorest and most vulnerable population, including refugees. Regarding the 
FFU, the following the activities will be financed: the establishment, training, equipment, staffing and technical 
assistance of the FFU to (i) manage the stock, including purchasing and selling selected food commodities as well as the 
initiation and monitoring of food distribution in the event of a crisis (including climate shocks, conflict, pandemics, etc.); 
and (ii) manage the Food Shortage Preparedness Fund established under sub-component 1.3. The establishment of the 
emergency food stock will also provide Djibouti with a climate adaptation mechanism in case agricultural production is 
affected by drought or floods. The MAU will work closely and exchange regularly with the FFU and advise on the 
management of the food stock. Storage-related activities will aim at ensuring energy efficiency in order to contribute to 
climate change mitigation. The terms and mechanisms to be followed for the procurement, storage and distribution of 
food commodities in case of crisis (including climate shocks, conflict, pandemics, etc.) will be stipulated in Framework 
Agreements signed between the GoD and importers/logistics companies. During project implementation, the GoD will 
ensure that a legal framework for the emergency food stock and its management tools (FFU, dedicated financial 
resources, etc.) is established. 
35. 
In case of food shortages in domestic markets, the distribution of food products will be carried out either by 
the private sector through commercial channels or by the MASS to the poorest and vulnerable segment of the 
population. Proceeds from the sale of food will be used by the GoD to replenish the food stock. Most of the emergency 
stock will be sold to (and distributed by) the private sector, thus benefiting a larger proportion of the population. The 
private sector will rely on its own local commercial network to sell and distribute the food. Part of the food reserve will 
be distributed by MASS through its usual channels of social support and according to specific vulnerability assessment 
criteria to ensure that in times of crisis the food reaches the poorest and most vulnerable, including refugees. The criteria 
for triggering the use of the emergency food stock will be indicated in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The 
GoD will adopt a specific manual for the management, rotation, and distribution of the food stock and the management 
of the Food Shortage Preparedness Fund (see sub-component 1.3) by the FFU. Proceeds from the sale will be transferred 
to an account opened at a commercial bank and will be used to replenish the stock. While food will be sold by the private 
sector at market prices, price fluctuations and the distribution of food to the poorest and vulnerable, may not allow the 
GoD to restore the food stock at its initial level. The GoD will then be able to use the Food Shortage Preparedness Fund 
to cover the gap in order to replenish the stock (see sub-component 1.3). During project implementation, the GoD will 
ensure that the financing of the gap for the replenishment of the emergency food stock is integrated into the country's 
national budget, possibly through the resources of the National Solidarity Fund. 
36. 
In the absence of a food shortage, the FFU will rotate the food stock by selling food to the private sector on a 
regular basis and well before the expiry date. The proceeds from these sales will also be deposited in a commercial 
bank account and used to replenish the stock. While the profits from the sales could be used to purchase additional 
quantities of food, the GoD can use resources from the Food Shortage Preparedness Fund (see sub-component 1.3) to 
cover any financial shortfalls in stock rotation. The GoD will adopt the Food Stock and Fund Management Manual (FFM) 
on the management, rotation, and distribution of the food stock and the management of the food shortage 
preparedness fund by the FFU. 
 
 
10 See Appendix 5 for the selection criteria used for the choice of food products purchased under the project. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 60  
     
 
37. 
The PIM will define the overall modalities for the purchase, storage, rotation, and distribution of food 
commodities. The FFM will establish detailed procedures for the control, rotation and destocking of food 
commodities. The food stock will be procured through selected importers and Framework Agreements will be signed 
between MASS and the importers/logistics companies. The MAU will recommend the release of the emergency food 
stock on the market (following established triggers), while the PSC will approve the release. Contracts with private 
operators will include the standard clauses of the World Bank's Anti-Corruption Guidelines (ACG). The sale of market 
commodities in case of crisis (including climate shocks, conflict, pandemics, etc.) will be monitored through a traceability 
mechanism supervised by the MCT. The MCT team in charge of price control in the local market will conduct 
independent market monitoring surveys to verify the availability of products in retailers' shops to prevent food diversion 
and smuggling.  
 
38. 
Sub-component 1.3. Establishing a Food Shortage Preparedness Fund (FPF) (US$5 million). The project will 
establish a FPF that can be used for: (a) the purchase of basic food commodities (rice, sugar, wheat flour, pasta, milk 
powder or vegetable oil) in the event of a potential food supply shortage as well as associated costs of transportation, 
storage, rotation and distribution of these commodities; and (b) covering of financial gaps in the replenishment of the 
emergency food stock established under sub-component 1.2. The disbursement of the FPF to purchase food 
commodities as described in (a) will be subject to the GoD’s confirmation in writing to the World Bank that a crisis has 
occurred or is imminent. The MAU will recommend the use of the FPF based on its analysis and the criteria established 
to purchase additional quantities of food commodities (beyond those purchased under sub-component 1.2). The PSC 
will approve the use of the FPF by declaring an emergency, which may also arise due to climate-related risks and 
disasters. The PSC will base its decisions on regular reports and recommendations received from the MAU. The 
procedures for purchasing food with the help of the FPF will be managed by the FFU. The FPF allows for the purchase of 
food commodities for an additional month. At the mid-term review of the project, a decision will be taken on partial or 
total reallocation (restructuring) of the Fund's resources, if necessary, based on existing food security risks and lessons 
learned from the first half of project implementation. The procedures for mobilizing the FPF will be described in the PIM 
and the role of the FFU will be detailed in the specific manual for managing the emergency food stock. 11 
 
39. 
The physical stock of selected basic food products (rice, pasta, and sugar) and the FPF would cover 
consumption needs for selected basic food commodities in Djibouti for a period of up to two months in case of food 
supply shortages. The time needed to purchase, process, and transport these food commodities from the country of 
origin to the port of Djibouti can take up to two months under normal market conditions. This will bridge the gap 
between procurement and delivery and provide necessary time to adapt to a crisis in the short run while seeking 
appropriate long-term solutions (such as locating new suppliers or investigating substitutes for food supply). 
 
40. 
Component 2: Mitigating food security risks posed by drought (US$5.0 million). The objective of this component 
is to mitigate food security risks posed by drought. The project will finance: (a) the improvement of access to water, 
through the rehabilitation of water infrastructures, the purchase of equipment for the repair of water infrastructures, 
as well as the acquisition, operation, and maintenance of water trucks and vehicles; (b) the restoration of agricultural 
and pastoral livelihoods through the provision of agricultural inputs, greenhouses, assets and inputs for livestock 
production, as well as technical assistance and training on climate resilient practices and technologies; and (c) the design 
of a drought warning system, the preparation of a rapid response plan and the operationalization of the drought warning 
system. The project includes selected agro-pastoral activities that aim to support Djibouti's adaptation to climate change 
in the long term. The project activities will be implemented in the five regions of the country and in the peri-urban area 
 
11 The establishment of a trade finance facility has been discussed with the IFC. The current urgency of the project does not allow for the 
immediate establishment of such a facility in the short term, but the project will explore its establishment during implementation. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 60  
     
 
of Djibouti City, all of which have been affected by the recent drought. The areas of intervention will be defined based 
on available data, assessments made during field visits, and proposals received from Regional Committees. The practical 
modalities will be based on the experience of the previous World Bank-supported projects (notably PRODERMO12 and 
PROLUC) and specified in the PIM.  
 
41. 
Sub-component 2.1. Improving access to water (US$1.9 million). To improve access to water for the population 
affected by drought and to strengthen the resilience of rural households to drought, the project will finance: (a) the 
rehabilitation of infrastructures for access to water (e.g. cisterns for human consumption, open-air reservoirs for 
livestock, and small dams to recharge aquifers, etc.); (b) the acquisition of equipment for the repair and maintenance 
of infrastructures for access to water; (c) the acquisition, operation, and maintenance of water trucks to fill the cisterns 
that have dried up due to the lack of rainfall; and the acquisition, operation, and maintenance of vehicles that will be 
used for planning, monitoring, and evaluation of the rehabilitation activities funded by the project. Climate resilient 
design standards will be applied for the rehabilitation of the above infrastructure to enhance adaptation to climate 
change. Based on an existing digital map showing the location of all water infrastructure in Djibouti, the precise selection 
of infrastructures to be rehabilitated will follow the assessments and needs expressed by the Local Steering Committees 
(LSCs) and the Water Management Committees (WMCs) that are already in place.  
 
42. 
Sub-component 2.2. Restoring agricultural and pastoral livelihoods (US$ 2.7 million). The objective of this sub-
component is to support drought-affected farmers and livestock-holding households to restore their productive assets 
and initiate climate adaptation activities for sustained food security. The project will finance: (i) agricultural inputs, 
including seeds of drought-resistant varieties, fertilisers, and small equipment (tools, motor pumps, etc.) to support crop 
and fodder production; (ii) small greenhouses equipped with drip irrigation, which will contribute to an increase in 
agricultural production and provide means of adaptation to climate change; (iii) assets and essential inputs for livestock 
production, including drought-resistant breeds of small ruminants (sheep and goats)13, adapted feeds, veterinary 
products such as deworming tablets, vitamins, etc.; and (iv) technical assistance and training for farmers and livestock 
herders on climate resilient practices and technical itineraries. The PIM will define the modalities for the distribution of 
agricultural inputs and support to livestock. The selection of beneficiaries will be based on an existing list of farmers and 
livestock breeders, according to field assessments and the needs expressed by the Regional Committees. Priority will be 
given to women-headed household in the allocation of inputs14.  
 
43. 
Sub-component 2.3. Supporting the establishment and operationalization of a drought warning system and 
the preparation of a rapid response plan (US$0.4 million). As drought is a recurrent phenomenon in Djibouti, and the 
incidence is expected to increase with climate change, it is essential to strengthen the country's resilience to future 
episodes. The project will finance: (a) the design of a drought warning system and the preparation of a drought rapid 
response plan; (b) the operationalization of the drought warning system based at MAEPE-RH, including software, 
computers, human resources, training, and data collection. This assistance will be coordinated with the support of IGAD 
and FAO. 
 
 
12 Djibouti Rural Development and Water Mobilization Project, P173702 
13 In order to promote the sustainability of the operation, the MAEPE-RH will examine the possibility of asking the beneficiaries to retrocede to 
neighbouring breeders the first female resulting from the crossbreeding of the animals received (F1). This will be specified in the PIM. 
14 Given that 30 per cent of households in rural Djibouti are female-headed, the project will prioritise 600 female-headed households (30 per cent 
of 2,000 households) and ensure that these households receive at least 35 per cent of the animals distributed, or 3,500 animals. In practice, this 
will mean that female-headed households will receive on average one more animal than male-headed households. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 60  
     
 
44. 
Component 3: Project management and preparation of a preparedness plan (US$ 1.5 million). The project will 
finance activities related to project management and implementation. The EFSCRP will finance the establishment of a 
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) that will include a project coordinator, a monitoring and evaluation specialist, a 
communication specialist, a procurement specialist, a financial management specialist, an environmental and social 
safeguards specialist, a grievance redress mechanism specialist, and additional staff as needed. Furthermore, for the 
needs of Component 2, the project will finance two regionally based technicians, an environmental and social safeguards 
assistant and a procurement assistant to be hosted by the MAEPE-RH. The project will also support the GoD in the 
development of a Food Security Preparedness Plan to be completed within twelve months of project effectiveness under 
the terms and conditions of the CRW-ERF. 
 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
 
45. 
Direct beneficiaries will include:  
 
● Djibouti's population, including the poorest and most vulnerable (including refugees) who are unable to afford 
basic food commodities.  
● Farmers and livestock-holding households most affected by the recent drought, and 
● Public and private sector actors supported through capacity building. 
 
46. 
Under Component 1, while the food stock will serve the entire population, the project will ensure that it also 
reaches the poorest and vulnerable, including refugees, who will benefit directly from a part of the emergency food 
stock in the case of crisis. This component will also strengthen national capacity to manage future food crises, as 
relevant government agencies and private sector actors will benefit from capacity development through the project.  
 
47. 
Under Component 2, the project will reach direct beneficiaries in rural communities across the country. The 
beneficiaries will include small-scale farmers and livestock herders, their families, and particularly women. It is estimated 
that about 8,000 households, including 6,000 herders and 2,000 farmers, residing in Obock, Tadjourah, Dikhil, Arta, and 
Ali-Sabieh and the outskirts of Djibouti city will benefit directly from the project. Given the average household size of 
6.2 people, the total number of beneficiaries is expected to lie around 50,000 people, or around 21 percent of the total 
rural population estimated at 240,000 in Djibouti. Of the total number of beneficiaries, it is estimated that 21,000 (or 
42 percent) will be women and that the youth (under 35) will represent more than half of the beneficiaries.  
 
D. Results Chain 
 
48. 
The results chain below (Figure 2) provides a hierarchical theory of change that illustrates the project’s 
components and key activities, outputs and intermediate outcomes, and results that will contribute to the overall 
project development objective. The project will support the establishment of an emergency food stock and a Food 
Shortage Preparedness Fund and will therefore enable the GoD to respond to potential food supply shocks in the short 
term. In addition, the project aims to strengthen the capacity of the public and private sectors to anticipate potential 
crises and ensure better price management, thereby enhancing the Government's capacity to mitigate related risks in 
the medium- and long-term. Similarly, while addressing the immediate needs of drought-affected farmers and livestock 
herders in restoring their livelihoods, the project also aims to support the establishment of a drought warning system, 
thereby strengthening the country's capacity to respond appropriately to this risk in the medium and long term. The 
project assumes that: (a) the private sector is ready to engage with the public sector on importing and storing an 
emergency food reserve, as well as selling these commodities (regular stock rotation as well as distribution in case of a 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 60  
     
 
food crisis); (b) public sector actors trained in pre-crisis signals and price risk management will use their knowledge to 
alert the PSC and other entities; (c) public sector actors trained in food stock management will use their knowledge to 
maintain the food reserve in the long run; (d) farmers and livestock herders will adopt the agricultural inputs, livestock 
and fodder distributed and climate-smart farming practices and techniques; and (e) the public and private sectors 
trained in price management will apply these tools. 
 
Figure 2: Theory of change 
 
 
 
 
49. 
Preventing, preparing for and responding rapidly to crises is part of the World Bank's mandate and the role of 
food security in crisis prevention is explicitly recognized in its Word Bank Group Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and 
Violence (FCV) 2020-2025. The project design draws on lessons learned from the Global Food Crisis Response Program 
(GFRP) implemented during the 2008-2009 food crisis. The World Bank has also been active in the agriculture and rural 
development sector in Djibouti for over a decade. It is comparatively well placed to respond from this perspective and 
is making use of the flexibility offered by paragraph 12 of the Investment Project Financing Policy and the relevant 
procedures for Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints ("Other Procedures: Proposal for 
Financing Certain Expenditures under the Loan - Section (3) Food Expenditures"). As a financial institution with a 
reconstruction and development mandate, the Bank's involvement in the response to the current food security crisis is 
based on its comparative advantage, driven by a strong development continuum rationale and an emphasis on sustained 
and long-term commitment to country systems, strengthening core state functions and building resilience and 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 60  
     
 
institutional capacity (in line with paragraphs 3(a) and 8 of the Bank's Policy - Development Cooperation and Fragility, 
Conflict and Violence). The proposed project has been designed to use existing channels (public and private sectors) to 
avoid disruption and displacement of the private sector.  
 
50. 
For the establishment of a drought warning system, the project will closely coordinate with other development 
partners, including IGAD and FAO. IGAD is currently assessing options for establishing a drought preparedness system 
for Djibouti and FAO has substantial experience in this area in contexts similar to Djibouti. The project, therefore, aims 
to work closely with these partners to build on existing knowledge and propose the best approach for Djibouti. 
 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
 
51. 
The project draws on the following relevant lessons from the World Bank Group's past and current responses 
to food and nutrition crises, including the GFRP as well as lessons learned from the Bank's engagement in agriculture 
and rural development in Djibouti and other countries in the region: 
 
(a) Lessons learned from the Community Rural Development and Water Mobilisation Project (PRODERMO) 
underpin the design of component 2. Specifically, access to safe water for humans and animals in response to 
drought is a powerful entry point for attracting interest and building trust with rural communities and is also 
a prerequisite for seizing a wide range of other economic opportunities. Such interventions are also essential 
in the context of climate change in Djibouti. 
(b) Importance of balancing speed with quality control: the project builds on existing, well-functioning systems 
by financing activities through institutions with prior experience and capacity to prepare and implement the 
operation. This helps to mitigate some of the potential risks associated with the institutional, technical and 
fiduciary aspects of the proposed operation. 
(c) Critical to ensure that the most vulnerable are targeted by emergency interventions. While the food stock 
under Component 1 will serve the entire population, the project will ensure that the poorest and most 
vulnerable are reached first, including refugees, who will benefit directly from part of the emergency food 
stock. Under Component 2, the project will primarily reach small-scale farmers and livestock herders and 
support them by improving their access to water, livestock, and agricultural inputs and equipment.  
(d) Focus on 'building back better' approaches to increase food production and build resilience: the project aims 
to strike a balance between responding to the emergency and building resilience to future crises.

A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
52. 
On behalf of the GoD, the MASS will be responsible for the overall coordination of project activities and will 
host the PIU. The project is complementary to the Emergency Social Protection Crisis Response Project (SPECRP, 
P178992) which became effective at the end of September 2022 to provide support to the GoD’ emergency response 
efforts. MASS will provide overall supervision of the project and will establish a PIU. The PIU will report to the Secretary 
General of MASS and will be responsible for project management, including procurement, financial management, 
environmental and social safeguards, communication, and monitoring and evaluation. In addition, for the purposes of 
Component 2, the PIU will include two regionally based technicians, an environmental and social safeguards specialist 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 60  
     
 
and a procurement assistant who will be hosted by the MAEPE-RH. The Project Steering Committee (PSC) set up and led 
by MASS for the SPECRP will be expanded to include the key ministries of the EFSCRP, in particular the MAEPE-RH, MCT, 
Ministry of Economy and Finance, in charge of Industry (Ministère de l’Economie et des Finance, chargés de l’Industrie, 
MEFI) and the Ministry of Budget; the Steering Committee will provide strategic guidance during the implementation of 
the project 
 
53. 
The MASS and MCT will provide technical leadership for Component 1. A Memorandum of Understanding will 
be signed between MASS and MCT within six months of project effectiveness, specifying the obligations and 
responsibilities of each party, including the human and material resources to be made available, including the 
designation of a focal point and the recruitment of staff of the MAU at MCT. The FFU, established at MASS, will manage 
the emergency food stock and the food shortage preparedness fund and will work closely with the MAU. The focal point 
nominated at the MAU will exchange regularly with the FFU and advise the FFU on the management of the food stock. 
Framework Agreements between MASS and importers/logistics companies will be established to define the roles and 
responsibilities of each party, the technical and contractual requirements for the purchase, storage and release of food 
products, the pricing rules and payment conditions, as well as the responsibilities of local importers in case of damage 
or loss of food commodities. In order to be selected, local importers will have to meet pre-defined qualification criteria, 
in terms of compliance with the World Bank's eligibility requirements; the PIM will specify the selection criteria and 
procedures. For food importers, for example, these criteria will include the number of years in the business of importing 
food and the volume of annual food imports. Successful importers will source their food commodities through 
established market practices acceptable to the World Bank. The distribution of food to the poorest and most vulnerable 
(including refugees) will follow the criteria and distribution channels established by MASS and will be conducted in close 
collaboration with United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the National Office for the Assistance to 
Refugees and Disaster-Stricken People (Office National d'Assistance aux Réfugiés et Sinistrés, ONARS). The remaining 
food will be sold at market prices by the private sector through its established networks.  
 
54. 
The MAEPE-RH will provide technical leadership for Component 2. A Memorandum of Understanding will be 
signed between the MASS and MAEPE-RH within six months of project effectiveness, specifying the obligations and 
responsibilities of each party, including the human and material resources to be made available, in particular the 
designation of a focal point and the recruitment of staff hosted by the MAEPE-RH. Two regionally based technicians 
(North and South), an environmental and social safeguards specialist and a procurement assistant will be hosted by the 
MAEPE-RH. See Figure 3 for an overview of the implementation modalities. 
 
55. 
Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The adoption of a PIM acceptable to the World Bank is a condition of 
project effectiveness. All PIU and implementing agency staff working on their respective components will be trained on 
component implementation mechanisms, delineation of roles and responsibilities, monitoring, verification, and 
reporting mechanisms to ensure that the project achieves its objectives in a clear and transparent manner.  
 
56. 
Specific Food Stock and Fund Management Manual. A separate manual on the management of the emergency 
food stock and fund will guide the procedures of the FFU. It will detail the operational mechanisms for stock 
management, as well as for initiating and monitoring the distribution of food to wholesalers and retailers in a crisis. The 
constitution of the Food Stock and Fund Management Unit and the adoption of the specific Food Stock and Fund 
Management Manual is a disbursement condition of the project. 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 60  
     
 
Figure 3: Implementation procedures 
 
 
 
 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
 
57. 
The project's monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements will be managed by MASS, which will hire technical 
assistance from individuals and firms as needed and will work closely with MCT and MAEPE-RH on data collection. As an 
integral part of project implementation, the M&E system will provide timely and reliable results for project management 
to facilitate informed decision-making. In addition to being an important management tool, the M&E system will be a 
valuable source of learning and knowledge management.  
 
58. 
The M&E arrangements will include regular monitoring through the project results framework and performance 
assessments, as deemed appropriate to determine implementation progress, verify results and challenges, and 
recommendations to address these challenges. The results framework includes indicators to verify progress towards the 
project's development objective, as well as intermediate indicators to monitor the implementation of all project 
components during the life cycle of the project. The results will be presented to the Bank in semi-annual progress reports 
as well as at the mid-term review (MTR) and in the final independent evaluation reports. The project will conduct a mid-
term review and a final evaluation prior to the project closure, including a beneficiary satisfaction survey.  
 
59. 
During project implementation and as part of Component 1, the PIU and the MCT (through the FFU) will jointly 
monitor the status of the emergency food stock on a monthly basis to ensure its integrity. Technical audits will be 
commissioned by the MCT to ensure that the food provided is in accordance with the quantity and quality stipulated in 
the contracts signed in collaboration with the National Food Analysis Laboratory. In addition, in the event of a food stock 
release, the MCT will monitor the availability of these products on national markets. To avoid elite capture under 
Component 2, potential beneficiaries of the project will be identified jointly by the PIU with the regional committees 
(and an appropriate arrangement for the peri-urban area of Djibouti City). These committees will be set up in each of 
the country's five regions; they will be chaired by the Regional Council and will include representatives of the prefecture, 
sub-prefecture, communities, civil society, women's associations, and the MAEPE-RH sub-directorate. An appropriate 
mechanism will cover the peri-urban area of Djibouti City. The MAEPE-RH will report to the PIU on the results of the 
implementation of component 2 through its focal point hosted at the MAEPE-RH. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 60  
     
 
 
C. Sustainability 
 
60. 
The project will support the GoD in the procurement, storage, rotation, and distribution of basic food items and 
will support all related operational and technical aspects. Through these activities, the project will therefore 
substantially contribute to testing and establishing an emergency food stock system and building the capacity of the 
GoD in making this system operational and sustainable. As the GoD will ensure that the emergency food stock is 
maintained and replenished with public funds in the future15 and that the project will provide technical assistance to 
anchor the operation in the government's wider budget and financial management system, the project is expected to 
have a sustainable long-term impact. In addition, Component 1 will support the establishment of a MAU to anticipate 
and report on potential food supply shocks and provide training to the public and private sectors on price risk 
management that will benefit the country in the long term. Component 1 will also support the establishment of the FFU 
for stock management, and for initiating and monitoring food distribution in the event of a crisis. During project 
implementation, the GoD will ensure that the emergency food stock and its management and replenishment tools are 
based on a sustainable legal framework. Capacity building and technical assistance activities will be based on 
international best practice, adapted to the Djibouti context.  
 
61. 
In addition, the project aims to restore rural livelihoods and food production in the short to medium term through 
a comprehensive set of activities aimed at restoring access to water and distributing inputs for agriculture and livestock, 
including the provision of small ruminants. Through these activities, the project will make a substantial contribution to 
ensuring the continuation of agro-pastoral activities in rural areas. The project will place particular emphasis on activities 
that strengthen the capacity of beneficiaries to adapt to climate change, including training in climate resilience practices 
and techniques and the distribution of climate-resilient animal breeds and seed varieties. The PIM will ensure that 
sustainability criteria govern the choice of investments and implementation procedures. In addition, the project will 
support the establishment of a drought warning system, strengthening the country's capacity to anticipate similar crises 
in the future and take the necessary preventive measures.

A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis   
 
Technical Analysis 
 
62. 
To address food security risks related to supply shocks, the project aims to establish an emergency food stock, 
following a simple and targeted approach. The procurement, storage and distribution of basic food commodities will 
be carried out by the private sector and will therefore build on existing systems. To this end, the World Bank team 
assessed the capacity of Djibouti’s private sector to import, store and distribute strategic food commodities purchased 
under the project. Meetings were held with the MASS, Chamber of Commerce and Port Authority/Free Zone 
Management, major importers, supermarkets (owned by two major business holdings), and logistics companies, 
including visits to business premises and warehouses in Djibouti city and the free zone. As per the findings of the 
assessment, the private sector importers have adequate capacity to import, store, and distribute strategic food 
commodities. Their import volume ranges from 5 to 50 containers per month, depending on the commodity, with an 
average turnover of US$5-30 million in food commodity trading in the Djiboutian market. The importers generally 
 
15 The Food Shortage Preparedness Fund will be able to contribute to this, as a first step. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 60  
     
 
benefit from economies of scale when procuring for the regional market, resulting in lower costs. The major importers 
conduct sizable trade with Ethiopia and use the free zone areas in Djibouti for storage and transit. 
 
63. 
While the storage facilities in Djibouti city vary, well-maintained storage facilities exist and can be used for the 
storage of food commodities purchased under the project. Most importers have warehouses (rented or owned) inside 
Djibouti for storing products aimed for the Djiboutian market, as well as lease space or warehouses in the free zones for 
storing bigger quantities or merchandise destined for Ethiopia. The warehouses outside the free zones, located inside 
the city of Djibouti, are mostly of poor quality, with the need for rehabilitation. Commodities are piled on pallets, with 
minimum attention to pest control, safety, and environmental conditions. In contrast, warehouses (leased by importers 
and logistics companies) in the different free zones are well maintained, and in some instances in norm and compliance 
with ESF requirements. Logistics companies can even provide vertical storage in chilled or controlled temperature 
warehouses, which could increase the storage period of the different food commodities. For quantities less than 5,000 
tons, all logistic companies have available space for subleasing.  
 
64. 
In response to drought-related food security risks, the project aims to restore livelihoods by adopting well-
tested approaches focusing on climate-smart practices and techniques. The project activities are beneficiary-driven 
and build on the MAEPE-RH's extensive knowledge of responding to similar crises as well as previous World Bank 
projects in the sector. Beyond the immediate support to farming and livestock-holding households, the project aims to 
prepare the ground for the establishment of a drought warning system by providing the necessary technical assistance 
and capacity building. 
 
Economic and Financial Analysis 
 
65. 
Quantifiable benefits. The expected quantifiable benefits of the project include: (a) access to an emergency food 
stock to avoid commodity shortages and mitigate price increases in the event of market shocks (component 1), (b) 
improved access to drinking and irrigation water (sub-component 2.1) and (c) improved livelihoods of drought-affected 
farmers and livestock herders (sub-component 2.2).  
 
66. 
The benefits of establishing an emergency food stock are expected to be substantial in relation to the costs 
incurred. Short-term benefits will be achieved by preventing a shock in the availability of basic food commodities, which 
would have high social and economic costs, including demonstrations or reduced economic activity. By supporting an 
uninterrupted supply, the project will particularly help to avoid the potential negative consequences of shortages for 
the poorest and most vulnerable segment of the population. In addition, the full or partial release of food stocks could 
contribute to a reduction in price increases and prevent speculative behaviour by the private sector. Medium-term 
benefits will result from the establishment of a food stock system, involving the procurement, storage, rotation, and 
distribution of basic food commodities, and related capacity building that will enable Djibouti to anticipate and respond 
adequately to future supply shocks. Although these benefits are difficult to quantify, they can be considered substantial. 
The costs of managing an emergency food stock include the cost of food products, as well as the costs of transport, 
storage, management, and distribution. The costs of the emergency food stock can therefore be considered minimal 
compared to the benefits obtained.  
 
67. 
Overall estimated return of the proposed project. Taking into account the above benefit and cost streams, the 
economic rate of return (ERR) for the baseline scenario is estimated at 10.8 percent. The economic net present value 
(ENPV) of the project's net benefit stream, discounted at 6 percent, amounts to US$2.7 million (the detailed EFA is 
provided in Annex 4).  
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 60  
     
 
 
68. 
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions analysis. The FAO Ex-Act tool was used for the ex-ante assessment of the 
project's impact on GHG emissions. The results of the GHG analysis indicate that the total net carbon balance is expected 
to lie at 1,870 total carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2-eq) of mitigated emissions per year at full development or 37,395 
tCO2-eq over the entire project lifetime. The ERR and ENPV were calculated using the estimated shadow price of carbon 
that changes from year to year according to the World Bank's Shadow Price of Carbon Guidance Note. The results of the 
scenarios with a low carbon price (starting at US$43 and changing over time), a high carbon price (starting at US$86 and 
changing over time), and no carbon are presented in Table 2. 
 
Table 2: GHG analysis 
 
Indicator 
Without carbon benefits 
scenario (Base case) 
Low carbon price scenario 
High carbon price scenario 
ENPV (US$ million) 
2.7 
3.8 
4.8 
ERR 
10.8% 
12.6% 
14.3% 
 
 
B. Fiduciary 
 
Financial management 
 
Overview of the Institutional Arrangements  
 
69. 
The MASS will be the fiduciary executing agency and the MCT and MAEPE-RH are technical implementing entities. 
MASS is experienced in implementing World Bank-funded projects, but its capacity will need to be strengthened through 
the PIU and technical assistance.  
 
70. 
The MASS will be responsible for the overall coordination and supervision of project activities, including fiduciary 
management, monitoring and evaluation, environmental and social risk management, knowledge sharing and reporting, 
including periodic financial reporting.  
 
71. 
The financial management (FM) system of the MASS was assessed. The main objective was to determine whether 
the financial management arrangements: (a) are capable of correctly and completely recording all project transactions 
and balances; (b) facilitate the preparation of regular, accurate, reliable, and timely financial statements; (c) safeguard 
project assets; (d) monitor and safeguard the food commodities stored in the warehouses; and (e) are subject to audit 
arrangements acceptable to the Bank. The evaluation followed the World Bank's investment financing policy and 
guidelines, as well as the principles of financial management assessment and risk rating. 
 
72. 
The proposed arrangements for monitoring and accountability of the project are considered acceptable and the 
financial management risk is Substantial after the implementation of the risk-mitigating measures. The critical risk is the 
risk of damages or loss of food commodities, and the financing gap in food stock replenishment. The financial 
management arrangements designed to mitigate the FM risk consist of: (a) the appointment of one financial 
management and one accountant in the PIU; (b) the preparation of financial management procedures, part of the 
Project Implementation Manual; (c) the design of food stock management procedures; (d) the preparation of interim 
financial reports in a format agreed with the World Bank, and deployment of an automated accounting system; (e) the 
recruitment of a qualified and experienced external auditor with terms of references acceptable to the World Bank, 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 60  
     
 
including the physical review of food stock and the assessment of internal control system to manage the stock; and (f) 
citizen engagement (citizen survey on food availability and distribution). In addition, the Framework Agreement signed 
between MASS and importers/logistics companies shall detail the obligations of these operators in case of damages or 
loss of the food stock and binding compensation measures. The selection criteria of storage services providers shall 
include the existence of a strong internal control system to store, monitor, safeguard and report timely on the status of 
the stock. Finally, the Government should increase the budgetary reserve which could serve to cover the potential 
financing gap for the food stock replenishment during the project implementation and consider expanding the National 
Solidarity Fund mandate to manage the budgetary reserve in case of a food crisis. The details of the financial 
management assessment are provided in Annex 2. 
 
Procurement 
73. 
Procurement under the project will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank Procurement Regulations 
for IPF Borrowers for Goods, Works, Non-Consulting and Consulting Services, dated November 2020 (‘Procurement 
Regulations’). The project will be subject to the World Bank’s ‘Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and 
Corruption in projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants’, October 15, 2006, revised in January 2011, 
and as of July 1, 2016. The project will use the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) to plan, record, 
and track procurement transactions. 
 
74. 
The simplified procurement procedures for ‘Situations in Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints’ 
described under paragraph 12 of Section III of the IPF Policy will be applicable to fast-track project procurement. Those 
will include: (a) direct selection, as appropriate; (b) increased thresholds for requests for quotations; and (c) selection 
of consulting firms using Consultant’s Qualification-based Selection. 
 
75. 
The MASS will be the project implementing agency with full fiduciary responsibility under the project while MCT 
and MAEPE-RH will provide technical leadership for Components 1 and 2 respectively. For the import of rice, pasta and 
sugar under sub-component 1.2, and for the purchase of basic commodities under sub-component 1.3, the MASS will 
enter into direct Framework Agreements with selected local importers/logistics companies who comply with the World 
Bank eligibility requirements and meet the predefined qualification criteria, in terms of the number of years in the food 
import business, volume of annual food imports and unqualified audit reports. The selected importers will procure food, 
using established market practices acceptable to the World Bank, in accordance with paragraph 6.46 of the Procurement 
Regulations. The guiding principles, procurement procedures, and contract conditions and form, acceptable to the 
World Bank shall be outlined in the PIM and in the Framework Agreements to be signed between the MASS and the 
importers/logistics companies including the template of the contract between the importers and suppliers. These 
principles shall, inter alia, include: 
 
a. Procurement procedures and contract conditions and form shall be consistent with market practices, 
acceptable to the World Bank; 
b. Ensuring that importers and suppliers comply with the World Bank eligibility requirements in accordance 
with paragraphs 3.21-3.24 of the Procurement Regulations and are qualified. In case of agents, the agent’s 
commission will also need to be disclosed. The food items shall also be from eligible countries of origin; 
c. Avoiding situations of conflict of interest, in accordance with paragraphs 3.14-3.17 of the Procurement 
Regulations, in the award of contracts; 
d. Ensuring compliance by the importer, supplier, and agents with the World Bank Anti-Corruption 
Guidelines in the procurement process and during contract execution; 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 60  
     
 
e. Oversight by the MASS of the procurement process to be carried out by the importers, through prior 
review and clearance of the draft contracts with selected food suppliers. The MASS shall ensure: (i) 
compliance with the accepted procurement practices and contract conditions, (ii) adherence to MASS-
MCT technical specifications and (iii) price reasonableness in comparison with prevailing market prices. 
The MASS shall obtain World Bank no objection to the contract with the local importers; 
f. The importer shall not sign contracts with suppliers until the clearance to proceed with the signature of 
the contract has been obtained in writing from the MASS; 
g. Payments for food purchased/shipped shall be made by MASS in US Dollars directly to suppliers in 
accordance with the terms stipulated in the signed contract. Payment for food import fees and storage 
shall be made by the MASS in US Dollars directly to importers; 
h. Maintaining all relevant records and allowing for inspections and audits by the MASS, through the external 
auditor, and by the World Bank, when requested. 
 
76. 
As a result of the war in Ukraine, food prices rose on international markets. To ensure security of supply in the 
context of volatile markets, food imports will involve multiple purchases by selected importers. Importers will prepare 
and share with MASS a schedule of planned purchases of the selected commodities. Each importer will request 
quotations for every scheduled purchase, from eligible and qualified international food suppliers who have a track 
record of supplying rice, pasta, and sugar at quality and on time. The quotation which offers the best combination of 
quality, price, delivery schedule, and storage cost, if applicable, shall be selected and a draft contract with the selected 
supplier shall be prepared using conditions of contract, acceptable to the World Bank. 
 
77. 
Capacity of the private sector for the import and storage of strategic food commodities. As part of appraisal, a 
food supply system assessment was conducted by the Bank to understand (a) the capacity of the private sector 
stakeholders in Djibouti to import, store and distribute strategic food commodities and (b) their interest in the 
participation in the implementation of the project with the GoD. The assessment concluded that the major importers of 
the targeted food commodities have longstanding business and relationship with international suppliers, sufficient 
technical capacity and financial capacity within the scope of volume envisioned in the project. These importers have 
warehouses (on rent or owned) inside Djibouti for storing products for the Djibouti market, but also lease space or 
warehouses in the free zones of Djibouti (e.g.: destinated to Ethiopia). Given the long-standing relationship with 
suppliers, contract models are simple purchase orders without many details. For this project, a contract shall include 
relevant contract specifications and data, including description of the commodity, quality and additional specifications, 
quantity and applicable delivery terms, period of delivery, price, payment terms and any relevant additional documents. 
With regards to the willingness of importers to participate in purchasing and storing of food commodities for the GoD, 
importers indicated readiness to contribute based on contract provisions to be negotiated and included in the 
Framework Agreement between MASS and importers. 
 
78. 
A procurement risk and capacity assessment of the project implementing agency (MASS) has also been carried 
out by the Bank. While the PIU at the MASS has experience in implementing projects following the World Bank 
Procurement Regulations, the MASS has no experience in the procurement of food commodities on international markets 
to be purchased under Component 1 and agricultural items to be purchased under Component 2. Historically, the 
procurement of food commodities has been carried out by private sector importers, in accordance with established 
market practices and they have managed to secure a continuous supply of food at market prices, through international 
qualified suppliers. Potential risks include the re-export of food to neighbouring countries, hoarding of food to resell at 
higher prices, and leakages downstream after the food is imported. Furthermore, there are risks of delays in procurement 
processing due to low threshold of oversight (DJF5 million equivalent to US$0.028 million) by the national procurement 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 60  
     
 
commission and contract award requiring multiple signatures. The Procurement risk is rated High. To ensure funds are 
used for the intended purposes and to mitigate procurement and integrity risks, the following measures will be put in 
place:  
 
a. The detailed procurement procedures, and contract conditions and form, acceptable to the World Bank 
shall be outlined in the PIM and in the Framework Agreements to be signed between the MASS and the 
importers as well as the form of contract between the importers and suppliers; 
b. The World Bank will review and clear the Framework Agreements between the MASS and selected 
importers prior to signature; 
c. The food purchase contracts between importers and suppliers shall be subject to the World Bank’s prior 
review. The MASS will be responsible for reviewing and approving the award recommendations/draft 
contracts and submitting these for the World Bank’s review through STEP; 
d. Given the volatile market conditions, and the short quotation validity period, the clearance of the draft 
contracts by the MASS and the World Bank shall be completed expeditiously as per timelines to be 
specified in PIM; 
e. Payments for food commodities purchased/shipped shall be made by the MASS directly to suppliers in 
accordance with the terms stipulated in the signed contract; 
f. The MASS will strengthen its procurement capacity through recruitment of additional staff; 
g. The World Bank team will provide close implementation support to the designated MASS staff during the 
initial stages of implementation; 
h. Technical audits will be commissioned by the MCT to ensure that the food supplied complies with the 
quantity and quality stipulated in the signed contracts and to monitor the distribution of wheat flour 
downstream; 
i. 
The MASS shall agree on the arrangements with the National Procurement Commission to give priority to 
procurement of food commodites to complete the entire procurement process including the 
Commission’s approval within the short bid validity period. 
 
79. 
 Procurement contracts under Component 2 will include small rehabilitation works (underground cisterns, open-
air reservoirs, and small dams to recharge aquifers), various goods (water trucks, agricultural inputs/seeds, small 
livestock, veterinary products etc.), and consultants for technical assistance. All these contracts are of low value (less 
than $0.5 million per contract) and not complex. 
 
80. 
Procurement Strategy for Development Project (PPSD). The MASS will develop a simplified Procurement Strategy 
for Development (PPSD). Given the urgent need for assistance, the PPSD and the Procurement Plan will be finalized in 
the early stages of project implementation. While Framework Agreements and food procurement contracts will be 
subject to prior review, remaining procurements under the project are expected to be relatively small in value and will 
mostly be subject to post review.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Djibouti Emergency Food Security Crisis Response Project (P178988) 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 60  
     
 
C. Legal Operational Policies 
. 
. 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
Yes 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 
No 
. 
 
81. 
The project triggers OP 7.50 (Projects on International Waterways) as project activities will use the water of the 
Awash River/Lake Abbe system, Weima River and Afar aquifer which are considered international waterways in 
accordance with the Policy. The project activities will be implemented throughout the country with an emphasis on the 
agriculture/rural areas affected by drought. Given the small-scale of investments and focus on rehabilitation of existing 
schemes, the project’s activities will not  adversely change the quantity or quality of water flows to other riparians and 
will not be adversely affected by the other riparians' possible water use. Accordingly, the exception to the notification 
requirement under paragraph 7 (a) was approved by the Regional Vice President on September 8, 2022. 
 
D. Environmental and Social 
 
82. 
While the project is expected to have positive effects, such as improved food security and rural livelihoods 
through increased agricultural and livestock production, its activities carry substantial environmental and social (E&S) 
risks. 
 
83. 
Under Component 1, environmental and social risks could include the loss of biodiversity due to trade and generic 
risks associated with food transportation and storage/retrieval operations (i.e. risks related to poor working conditions, 
occupational health and safety, waste generation). Poor storage and occupational health and safety practices can 
increase the risk of combustible dust explosions and inhalation of dust particles that are harmful to the health of storage 
workers. As food handling operations are expected to be minor and to be carried out exclusively by domestic 
contractors, the project is not expected to result in a significant influx of labour. Other risks/impacts include those 
related to forced labour in the supply chain among importers/logistics companies. 
 
84. 
Under Component 2, a variety of environmental and social risks and impacts could arise from the proposed 
activities. These include E&S risks and impacts during civil works on rural water infrastructures (e.g.: air, noise, water 
and waste pollution) and the possibility of introducing animal diseases due to th