[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 110259 chars → Filtered: 71129 chars (35.5% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
 
1. 
The COVID-19 pandemic had a significant negative impact on Djibouti’s economy and is estimated to have 
doubled Djibouti’s extreme poverty rates, with spatial inequality a persistent challenge. Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) growth fell from 7.8 percent in 2019 to 0.5 percent in 2020, its lowest level since 2000. The percentage of 
extreme poor increased from 17 percent in 2019 to 23-30 percent in 2021. Marked differences in welfare levels 
between the main cities and rural areas also remain. The share of the population living below the poverty line varies 
greatly by region: 10 percent in Djibouti City, 23 percent in Ali Sabieh, 28 percent in Arta, 35 percent in Obock, 51 
percent in Dikhil and 61 percent in Tadjourah. The highest poverty rates in Tadjourah and Dikhil could be partly 
explained by the large share of population living in rural areas in these two regions (77 percent and 64 percent, 
respectively) and consequently the limited income opportunities that their residents have access to. 
 
2. 
The war in Ukraine, the current drought, and the spillover of the conflict in Ethiopia further compounded the 
COVID-19 impacts in Djibouti. GDP growth reached 4.3 percent in 2021, 2 points below the level expected before the 
conflict in northern Ethiopia and more than 3 points below the pre pandemic level. According to a survey of 118 heads 
of enterprises conducted by the National Institute of Statistics (Institut national de la statistique de Djibouti - INSD) in 
2020, 54 percent of businesses have seen more than 75 percent of their activities affected by the lockdown from 
March 27 to May 17, 2021. Growth is projected to soften to 3.3 percent in 2022 reflecting spillover effects of the crisis 
in Ethiopia and the war in Ukraine. These reductions in economic activity directly reduce consumers purchasing power 
and their economic access to services, hence adversely affecting consumption smoothing for households. In addition, 
Djibouti hosts approximately 35,000 displaced people, including over 23,000 refugees and 11,000 asylum-seekers and 
has registered an increased inflow of refugees/migrants of close to 8 percent since January 2021, largely due to the 
conflict in Ethiopia and Yemen, further increasing pressure on the already low capacitated systems for basic services, 
especially among the poor and vulnerable. 
 
3. 
Djibouti is highly dependent on imports for local consumption. This is particularly the case with refined 
petroleum and food products that represent 39 percent and 16.5 percent of Djibouti’s total imports respectively. The 
country meets up to 90 percent of its food needs through imports. Domestic agricultural and livestock production 
account for about 3 to 4 percent of the total GDP and can only meet 10 percent of the country's food consumption 
needs. This high reliance on imports makes Djibouti extremely vulnerable to shocks in international trade. While 
Djibouti’s direct imports from Ukraine are small, it imports 60 percent of its wheat flour from Turkey which purchases 
74 percent of its wheat from Russia. 
 
4. 
Food prices particularly wheat, vegetable oil, fruits and vegetables increased significantly since February 2022 
affecting the poor and vulnerable disproportionately. Compared with January 2022, the cost of the food basket 
increased over 4 percent by February 2022. In addition, in March 2022, the price of wheat flour and cooking oil 
recorded, in one week, a sudden increase of 27 percent and 33 percent, respectively, triggering protests from bakers. 
While the Government did not authorize a bread price increase, these inflationary trends put pressure on household 
welfare and productive sectors and affect the poor and vulnerable disproportionately. 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 8  
     
 
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
5. 
Extreme poverty and vulnerability among several segments of Djibouti’s population remains high. With about 
three-quarters of the country’s population, Djibouti city accounts for about 42 percent of poor households, despite 
its lower poverty rates. Rural areas lag behind the capital city, with higher rates of extreme poverty (62.6 percent) and 
limited access to services. Women tend to be among the most vulnerable, with lower labor force participation and 
higher unemployment compared to men, and more limited access to services. Latest data from ILOSTAT (2022) shows 
that only two percent of women employed (of total women employed) in Djibouti are managers compared to 25 
percent of men, and only 7 percent of firms have majority female ownership (Enterprise survey 2013). Anecdotal 
evidence suggests that female headed households are particularly vulnerable to food insecurity, comprising about 20 
percent. Refugees and host communities are among the most affected by these crises. Djibouti continues to face 
security and economic challenges from a trade shock with Ethiopia which has increased security and social 
expenditures to support COVID-19 outlays and inflows of refugees. 
 
6. 
The global economic impact of the war in Ukraine and the severe drought affecting Djibouti are causing price 
increases and affecting the poor and vulnerable. Djibouti relies exclusively on imports to meet its domestic demand 
for wheat and wheat-based products. The country consumes on average, 3,900 metric tons (mt) of wheat flour and 
1,922 mt of pasta per month, which constitute approximately 30 percent of the country’s daily caloric intake. While 
Djibouti’s direct imports from Ukraine are small, it imports 60 percent of its wheat flour from Turkey - which purchases 
74 percent of its wheat from Russia. In March 2022, Turkey partially banned the export of wheat flour as well as a 
number of other basic food commodities, joining other countries in imposing trade restrictions, thereby further adding 
to market disruptions, and increasing Djibouti’s already high vulnerability to shocks. 
 
7. 
Severe drought conditions over the past 6 months led to reduced harvests and significantly affected 
households’ consumption smoothing. In 2021, the average temperature recorded in Djibouti increased by more than 
+3.7°C compared to the values recorded during the 1981-2021 period. The almost total absence of rains during the 
month of February 2022, combined with the lack of rains over most of the territory in 2021, has sharply accentuated 
the deterioration of vegetation and pastures, and resulted in a rapid drop in groundwater levels in traditional wells 
and cisterns constituting the water sources for livestock and drinking water supply of nomadic rural populations. 
Reduced water availability has already resulted in the drying up of water points (wells, cisterns, wadis, etc.). A filling 
rate of wells fell below 50 percent the level considered normal for Djibouti. Vegetable crops have been affected by 
the lack of water. These factors forced most farmers to decrease their plots this year, which will result in reduced local 
food production for household consumption due to drought. These further exacerbate the shortage of food caused 
by shocks to imports as described above. 
 
8. 
Poorer Djiboutian households spend a larger proportion of their total household expenditure on food than 
richer ones making them more susceptible to food prices increase. Households in the first and second deciles of the 
consumption distribution spend over 50 percent of their total consumption on food. Given the national poverty rate 
of 17 percent, as measured in 2019, these first two deciles capture most of the poor population in Djibouti. In contrast, 
the top decile, i.e., the richer households, spend around 32 percent of their consumption on food. This analysis 
suggests that poorer households are significantly more susceptible to price shocks than richer ones. As a result of 
higher food share in poorer households’ consumption basket and the faster increase in food prices over the last 
decade, poorer households in Djibouti face a higher price index than the average Consumer Price Index (CPI). An 
analysis of the CPI with a distributional lens shows that the poorest 10 percent of the population face prices 6 percent 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9  
     
 
higher than those of the richest 10 percent of the population, and 5 percent higher than the overall CPI using the 
standard measurement methodology. This illustrates the vulnerable status of poorer households to price changes and 
highlights the importance of cushioning the price shock and bolstering their ability to smooth consumption. 
 
9. 
Climate change poses a very serious threat to Djibouti’s human capital development, and the low-income 
households targeted by the proposed project lack resources to deploy positive coping mechanisms. Severe weather 
endangers local food production capacity, water availability, public health, and economic livelihoods. Djibouti is highly 
vulnerable to natural disasters, including extreme heat, multi-annual drought, flash floods, coastal storm surge, and 
water. Over the past 30 years, the country has suffered from eight major droughts, including one in 2008 that affected 
380,000 people, killed 70 percent of the livestock, and cut agricultural output in half. Aridity is increasing, as 
temperatures are already 0.7 ⁰C (Djibouti City) to 1.4 ⁰C (Ali Sabieh) above preindustrial annual averages and may rise 
by a total of 5.2 ⁰C by the end of the century. Prolonged drought is often followed by heavy rains that result in flash 
floods, which displace tens of thousands, extend the range of vector-borne disease, and damage critical water and 
sanitation infrastructure. With 88 percent of the country’s one million population living on the coast, sea level rise 
and tropical cyclones constitute significant risks. Djibouti is also forecasted to experience more highly unusual (3-
sigma) and unprecedented (5-sigma) summer months of extreme temperature anomalies than other Middle East and 
North Africa (MENA) countries. Almost every Djiboutian resident is subject to one or more climate-related risks. The 
low-income, vulnerable populations targeted by this project lack the resources to prepare and adapt to extreme 
weather risks and are likely to suffer the highest economic losses from floods, drought, and storms. 
 
10. 
Female head of households are especially vulnerable to food insecurity as they are more likely to lack access 
and less likely to consume the necessary nutrition compared to households headed by men1. As such, many female-
headed households’ resort to negative coping mechanisms (20 percent) compared to their male counterparts (15 
percent). Additionally, fewer women than men, at 9 vs 17 percent respectively, own bank accounts at a financial 
institution or with a service provider. 
 
11. 
Djibouti’s Social Protection Systems (SPSs) center around effective response to crises and have demonstrated 
flexibility to respond and mitigate impacts in the past crises. The SPSs have evolved in recent years and are closely 
aligned with the Government of Djibouti’s (GoD) Vision 2035 and its National Social Protection Strategy which 
recognize the importance of a long-term, development-oriented approach of building national adaptive SPSs that can 
effectively respond to the crises and mitigate their impacts among the poor and vulnerable Djiboutians. The Ministry 
of Social Affairs and Solidarity (MASS) has established a social registry that facilitates the scale-up of the national safety 
net program to increase safety nets coverage of the poor and vulnerable. The MASS has also an established delivery 
system for benefits, including reaching the difficult-to-reach areas through mobile banking. The existing system 
enables emergency response and can be strengthened to facilitate recovery from the crises, and further enhanced to 
increase resilience and adaptability. The social registry integrates different government programs, such as the National 
Program for Solidarity and Family cash transfer program (Programme Nationale de Solidarité Famille-PNSF), subsidized 
healthcare, and social housing. In addition, the social registry includes biometric information on enrolled beneficiaries 
who are issued national ID cards. The social registry has been effective in implementing the mitigation measures taken 
by the GoD during the COVID-19 crisis to reach intended beneficiaries in an efficient and timely manner. 
 
12. 
The proposed project builds on and scales the existing Integrated Cash Transfers and Human Capital Project 
(P166220) (Projet intégré de transferts monétaires et du renforcement du capital humain-PITCH) by expanding 
coverage horizontally and contributing to strengthening adaptive social protection systems. The MASS, in 
 
1 ADP 2020 Report based on Djibouti Household Survey 2017 – EDAM-4. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10  
     
 
consultation with the INSD, forecast that an average of 68,033 households needs urgent emergency relief support in 
the rural and urban areas. Of these, 15,640 households already benefit from transfers funded by the GoD, the World 
Bank, and the World Food Program (WFP). Consequently, at least 52,393 new households need emergency relief while 
the existing 15,640 beneficiary households may need additional support to compensate for erosion of value in their 
current benefits. The GoD would like to use the proposed project resources to provide transfers to at least 15,000 
households that are severely affected by the multiple crises and 2,200 students studying away from their homes in 
rural areas who are unable to provide for their basic consumption and upkeep needs. In addition, the project will 
support activities that contribute to the enhancement of establishing adaptive social protection systems that will help 
to effectively respond to future crises by protecting the poor and vulnerable. Once well developed, the systems will 
also facilitate the targeting of the refugees that benefit from programs supported by many development partners. 
Furthermore, building on the productive inclusion initiatives already in place, the project will support economic 
empowerment amongst the vulnerable segments of the communities by providing livelihoods grants that support 
recovery from current crises and preparedness for the future crises. Lastly, the proposed project will sustain 
implementation of accompanying measures to promote human development which have been piloted under the 
PITCH. 
 
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
 
13. 
The proposed project is fully aligned with the World Band Group (WBG) FY22-26 Country Partnership 
Framework (CPF) for Djibouti which emphasizes the need for the WBG to remain flexible and adaptable to events 
in a region experiencing high levels of volatility2. The CPF was prepared in a global and national context marked by 
the COVID-19 pandemic and expressed support for the government’s overarching Vision 2035 and the priorities of the 
new national strategy. It is aligned with the Vision 2015-2035 which is Djibouti’s long-term strategy to build the 
country's future and includes a Pillar on investing in human capital “Building a hardworking, healthy and educated 
workforce” and with the recently revised medium-term strategy of the GoD “Djibouti Institutions-Connectivity-
Inclusion” for 2020-24, which constitutes the second phase of the country’s operationalization of Djibouti Vision 2035. 
It is also aligned with the Strategic Framework for Mainstreaming Citizen Engagement in World Bank Group 
Operations. 
 
14. 
The proposed project is consistent with the “WBG Response to the Global Impacts of the war in Ukraine: A 
proposed Roadmap.” The response includes support to ensure that the poor have access to food by scaling up social 
safety nets and improving the resilience for long-term crisis response. The World Bank’s response is closely 
coordinated with that of other development partners. The project design recognizes the exceptional nature of the 
current crisis and of its impact on Djibouti with emergency measures aimed at protecting poor and vulnerable 
segments of the population against the fallout of the war in Ukraine. 
 
15. 
Furthermore, the project is aligned with the WBG MENA Strategy and the WBG Climate Change Action plan 
2021-2025. The project reflects the priorities of the WBG MENA Enlarged Strategy, which focuses on harnessing 
human capital, leveraging digital technologies and Maximizing Finance for Development, in addition to the MENA 
Climate Roadmap (2021-2025). 
 
 
 
2 The strategy aims at supporting the post-pandemic recovery by: (i) reinforcing social and economic inclusion; (ii) implementing structural reforms to 
enhance connectivity and leverage regional integration in logistics, water, energy, telecom/information and communications technology, and transport; 
and (iii) strengthening public institutions to improve service delivery and macroeconomic stability. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11  
     
 
 
16. 
The proposed project is also aligned with the national social protection strategy which sets an ambitious 
agenda for improving the living standards of the poor and the vulnerable and resilience of households to respond 
to economic shocks. The strategy recognizes the importance of social protection coupled with preventing malnutrition 
and promoting development of children to build human capital. Furthermore, it emphasizes the importance of a long-
term, development-oriented approach to building a national social protection system that integrates different forms 
of social assistance, including the scaling up of a poverty-targeted cash transfer program and promoting health and 
nutrition in the early years at the local level. 
 
17. 
Finally, the proposed project is aligned with the government multi-faceted response to the various crises 
facing the country. The recently announced national action plan intends to cushion Djibouti’s population from soaring 
prices, in particular for basic necessities, and to guarantee the acquisition of kerosene and diesel and to protect the 
poor by providing cash transfers that address the poverty and social risks associated with food price increases.

A. Project Development Objective (PDO) 
 
PDO Statement 
 
18. 
The PDO is to provide safety net transfers to targeted households affected by the multiple crises facing Djibouti 
and strengthen adaptive social protection mechanisms to respond to  future crises.  
 
PDO Level Indicators 
 
19. 
The following are the proposed PDO level indicators: 
 
• 
Beneficiaries of safety net transfers under the project (number) 
o Beneficiaries of safety net transfers under the project – female (number) 
o Beneficiaries of safety net transfers under the project - in-kind transfers (number) 
o Beneficiaries of safety net transfers under the project - in a climate change-impacted districts 
(number) 
o Beneficiaries of safety net transfers under the project – students (number) 
• 
Targeted localities with improved mechanisms for linking social protection and crises response (percentage) 
• 
Beneficiaries of safety net transfers  with an account in an acceptable financial institution  (percentage)  
o Beneficiaries of safety net transfers  with an account in an acceptable financial institution- female 
(percentage) 
o Beneficiaries of safety net transfers  with an account in an acceptable financial institution- rural area 
(percentage) 
• 
Beneficiaries of livelihoods grants with fully implemented subprojects  (number) 
o Beneficiaries of livelihoods grants with fully implemented subprojects - female (number) 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12  
     
 
 
B. Project Components 
 
20. 
The proposed project will provide safety net transfers to the target households affected by the crises, and 
strengthen adaptive social protection mechanisms for response to future crises. The project will also contribute to 
community recovery and resilience. Support will also include digitization of social protection delivery mechanisms 
(through open bank accounts) to improve the efficiency of the delivery of benefits and strengthen comprehensive 
digital innovations in future operations and responses.  Implementation is underpinned by lessons from over a decade 
of World Bank’s strong engagement in social protection in Djibouti, including the ongoing PITCH operation which this 
operation scales up.  
 
Component 1: Emergency Safety Nets Transfers (US$22 million) 
 
21. 
Food and fuel price increases for basic products adversely affect the poor and vulnerable households by 
exacerbating their living conditions, and eroding their human capital, causing them to resort to negative coping 
mechanisms. Component 1 activities of will thus respond to the consumption smoothing needs of the poor and 
vulnerable households with the objective of mitigating the above risks – including ensuring that households receive 
adequate nutritious food intakes. In doing so, the project will help households to protect their human development 
gains during the current period of overlapping crises. 
 
22. 
This component will support the horizontal scale-up of the national safety net program by providing targeted 
transfers in cash and in-kind to the poor and vulnerable households affected by drought, food, and fuel price increases. 
New coverage is expected to reach a total of 86,200 new beneficiaries15,000 households3 and 2,200 students. Of these, 
about 28,733 beneficiaries (approximately 5,000 are new urban households) who have access to bank accounts and 
will receive benefits through the accounts; 57,467 beneficiaries (approximately 10,000 households)  are located in rural 
households areas where the impacts of the crisis have been disproportionate and the delivery of benefits will be in-
kind (in form of food)4 to respond to current emergency needs for consumption; while the 2,200 are students from 
extremely rural areas where providing meals at university sites remains challenging and sustaining studying without 
meals is of high concern. 
 
23. 
A combination of geographical, community-based, categorical and Proxy-Means Targeting mechanisms will be 
used in a complementary way to identify beneficiaries and minimize exclusion and inclusion errors that may arise from 
inadequate coverage of the social registry and biases that result from community beneficiary identification. The main 
source of beneficiary targeting will be the social registry. Community-based targeting will be done in areas not covered 
by the social registry. Enrolled beneficiaries will undergo validation through community visits and public meetings. 
 
24. 
Safety net transfers will be provided to the targeted poor and vulnerable households both in rural and urban 
areas, and MASS has estimated that rural households in hard-to-reach localities have disproportionately been affected 
by the impacts of the crises, yet they benefit less from existing programs. In consultation with the INSD, MASS assessed 
a rural to urban safety nets transfers coverage of 67 percent and 33 percent respectively. Support to target households 
will be provided for an estimated maximum of eight calendar quarters equivalent to 24 months and paid quarterly. The 
benefit level is fixed at the current safety net amount equivalent to Djiboutian Francs (DJF) 10,000 (approximately 
 
3 Djibouti’s average household size is estimated at 5.6 members according to information provided by the MASS. 
4 Food distribution at a rate of US$73 per transfer per month per household is MASS’ estimate based on the current prices. MASS has 
been proving food transfers to the poor and vulnerable periodically. Transfers are done by MASS’ local offices and procured locally.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13  
     
 
US$56) per household per month for cash transfers, while it is US$73 for in-kind transfers. 
 
Component 2: Strengthening Adaptive Social Protection and Community Resilience Mechanisms (US$5.8 million) 
 
25. 
Component 2 will finance activities to strengthen and further develop adaptive social protection systems; scale 
up productive inclusion activities under the PITCH project with an emphasis on making the activities more responsive 
to crises; and contribute to the overall community engagement and awareness about crises impacts, preparedness and 
mitigations. 
 
26. 
Strengthening adaptive social protection systems. Activities under this intervention will scale-up 
implementation of some of the productive inclusion training activities5 with greater focus on recovery from the crises 
and building resilience to future shocks. This intervention will thus complement the work under the PITCH project by 
introducing community mobilization and training on crises response, financial literacy training and voluntary savings 
promotion to a new cohort of beneficiaries in rural and urban areas. In addition, capacity building will be provided to 
credit and savings associations which include local women groups with the aim to expand financial services to 
vulnerable women. To complement the work currently being done on the social registry, the proposed project will 
support development of policy and implementation guidelines for building links between social protection 
interventions and national disaster response programs. Component 2 will further contribute to crisis sensitive 
institutional capacity building which will help to improve the capacity of social protection response to crises at the 
MASS and affiliated institutions and local administrative agencies. Lastly, investing in digital innovations to build more 
efficiency in the delivery of safety nets to the target households to build mechanisms that can underpin comprehensive 
digitalization of safety nets to respond to future crises will be supported: beneficiary accounts opening which is 
currently mainly practiced in urban areas will be promoted in rural areas among project beneficiaries with the village 
savings and loan associations (Associations de villageoises d’épargne et de crédit - ALECs) or CPEC branches. 
 
27. 
Strengthening community resilience mechanisms. The project will support community resilience through 
funding one off grants to complement household level support with community livelihoods subprojects to help 
households address common emergency and social economic challenges at the locality level. The grants will be 
provided based on a predetermined criteria which will include but may not be limited to (i) beneficiary participation in 
capacity building and awareness activities of the project; (ii) presentation of a basic action plan for implementing a 
livelihood strengthening activity; (iii) built-in arrangements of promoting recovery and resilience; (iv) potential to cause 
positive changes in the community; and (v) an exit plan for sustainability. Additional weight will be given to subprojects 
submitted by women. Prioritization of subprojects will be captured by community development groups, including 
women’s groups, who will be guided to select subprojects with stronger crises response sensitivity and that will build 
more awareness and skills among the communities on recovery and preparedness. The detailed criteria for selecting 
the subprojects will be included in the POM guidelines for the communities. 
 
28. 
To ensure women can equally benefit from the activities under this component, and to both expand and close 
the gender gap in account ownership, these activities will be carried out in collaboration with local women’s group and 
at times/locations to ensure women’s participation. Eligibility criteria will consider issues specific to women, with 
waivers to certain conditions, and information about the benefits of such savings will be made accessible through 
multiple channels, including face to face. In addition, support under this component will include identifying mechanisms 
for enhancing demand side aspects that will boost easier access of benefits by the households.  
 
5 Productive inclusion activities under the PITCH project are focused on soft training for cash and in-kind transfer beneficiaries and 
providing them with grants for implementing subprojects of choice for economic empowerment. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14  
     
 
 
Component 3: Project Management and Coordination (US$2.2 million) 
 
29. 
This component will support coordination, monitoring, evaluation, and the additional project operational costs 
of MASS and other institutions involved in implementation support at the central and local levels. Operational costs 
will include transport and targeting costs and costs associated with community mobilization and several other day-to-
day operational expenses to be detailed in the project annual budgetary work plan. 
 
Retroactive Financing 
 
30. 
A retroactive financing in an amount not exceeding SDR 400,000 (US$539,880 equivalent) will be used for 
eligible expenditures incurred twelve months before the signing of the Grant Agreement, to finance costs related to 
early response to the crises such as goods, training and operating costs. Expenditures shall be eligible if they were 
incurred in accordance with the World Bank's procedures for financial management, procurement, and environmental 
and social standards. 
 
Citizen Engagement 
 
31. 
The project will deploy a range of citizen engagement and social accountability mechanisms to ensure that 
citizen beneficiaries are able to provide their feedback and inputs regarding the project’s processes, progress, and 
results. For component 1, the project will implement an inclusive outreach campaign on the scale-up of the national 
safety net program, the categories of beneficiaries that will be targeted by the program and the nature, amount, and 
frequency of benefits for targeted populations. The communication efforts will be tailored to the information needs of 
rural and urban beneficiaries through digitized and non-digitized means. The project will also implement regular 
beneficiary feedback surveys to determine the satisfaction of target households with the program, the findings of which 
will be used to generate periodic action plans with timebound actions that will be used to follow up and “close the 
loop” on feedback provided by survey participants. For components 1, and 2 capacity building to strengthen the links 
between social protection and crises response will focus on establishing community led social accountability 
committees. The functions of these committees will include the following: (i) identifying target beneficiaries and 
minimize exclusion and inclusion errors that may arise as a result of inadequate coverage of the social registry and 
biases that come with community beneficiary identification; (ii) engaging with designated central and local government 
representatives on a regular basis to apprise them of impending risks and crises related to social protection; and (iii) 
conducting outreach on the social protection program and facilitating uptake of feedback from program beneficiaries.  
 
Climate Co-Benefits 
 
32. 
Djibouti is vulnerable to the manifestations of climate change. Exposure to climate risks is likely to increase in 
the coming years. Even before February 2022, stocks of imported wheat were low, while drought caused reduced local 
food production. This project, through its three components, intends to help build resilience to food insecurity among 
vulnerable population in drought-prone areas: by establishing mechanisms for social protection response, and 
providing safety net transfers for rapid response to the current food situation. The national safety net program will be 
expanded horizontally to provide targeted cash and in-kind transfers to households in climate vulnerable areas. Jointly, 
these activities will achieve short-term adaptation to recent drought and overlaying food security shocks and contribute 
to climate resilience of food supply for vulnerable population in Djibouti in the medium- to long-term. 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15  
     
 
Gender 
 
33. 
The proposed project will be implemented in a gender sensitive manner to ensure women can equally benefit 
from the activities funded by the project. The project will promote closer collaboration with local women’s groups to 
promote women participation and representation in the community development committees that play a significant 
role in community targeting and subproject prioritization, with additional weight given to subprojects submitted by 
women. The capacity building support to community savings and credit schemes will also promote eligibility criteria 
that consider issues specific to women. In addition, the accompanying measures which will target all beneficiaries at 
the community level to promote behavior changes that positively impact on human development are already largely 
led by the women groups, an aspect that will be sustained and strengthened. 
 
C. Project Beneficiaries 
 
34. 
The project beneficiaries are the targeted poor and vulnerable households affected by the continued COVID-
19 induced effects, the wars in Ethiopia and Ukraine, and the current drought in the country. Consequently, 
beneficiaries will also include the poor and vulnerable households to be assessed as impacted by the increase in prices 
of basic commodities resulting from the crises. These overlapping crises have affected both the rural and urban 
households. The targeted beneficiaries will also include institutions that will benefit from capacity building programs 
financed by the project as well as relevant public servants participating in the programs. In addition, students from the 
poor and vulnerable in rural areas studying away from home, will be supported with cash transfer stipends. Lastly, 
communities, as a whole, will benefit from improved adaptive systems as well as livelihoods subprojects. 
 
D. Results Chain 
 
35. 
The results chain below provides hierarchical theory of change that illustrates the project components and main 
activities, outputs, and intermediate results, as well as the outcomes that will contribute to the achievement of the 
overall PDO. 
 
 
 
 
P          P     S
         S
   P  S        D     
  S   S
       S
PD 
 o provide 
safety net 
transfers to 
targeted 
households 
a ected by 
the mul ple 
crises facing 
Djibou  and 
strengthen 
adap ve 
social 
protec on 
mechanisms 
to respond 
to future 
crises
 mergency Safety  ets 
 ransfers
Iden  ca on of households 
a ected by crises , 
Enrolment of bene ciaries, 
Update social registry with rural 
and urban bene ciary 
households,
Accurate bene ciaries 
iden  ca on and enrolment
 orizontal and ver cal safety 
net program scale up
Cash and in  kind transfers 
delivered to target bene ciaries
 ccess to emergency 
safety nets by the 
targeted poor and 
vulnerable households in 
rural and urban areas
Strengthening 
 dap ve Social 
Protec on and 
 ommunity  esilience 
 echanisms
Develop tools for linking social 
protec on and crisis response
Undertake communica on 
campaigns among all stakeholders 
on crises and mi ga ons
Iden fy and implement community 
resilience strengthening subprojects
Mechanisms for linking 
SP and crises response 
Improved Inter  
ins tu onal crises 
response arrangements
Enhanced community 
awareness on crises
 nhanced 
mechanisms for 
social protec on 
systems response to 
crises
Project  anagement and 
 oordina on
Provision of trainings to MASS 
( other ins tu ons involve in 
emergency response), ADDS, CPEC 
and local governments on 
emergency response mechanisms
Capacity of key 
ministries is built to 
manage and monitor 
safety nets (cash   in  
kind)
 risis response 
e orts of the 
  SS and 
di erent 
government 
ministries and 
en  es 
strengthened
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16  
     
 
 
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
 
36. 
The World Bank has been involved in social protection and emergency response in Djibouti for more than a 
decade and is well placed to mobilize rapid support to national systems, strengthening core state functions, and 
building institutional resilience and capacity. World Bank support is also aligned with OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crisis 
and Emergencies), where it may provide rapid response to help preserve human, institutional, and/or social capital, 
and support measures to mitigate or avert the potential effects of imminent emergencies in countries at high risk. 
 
37. 
The project design builds on the lessons learned from the PITCH operation and the Global Food Crisis 
Response Program through which the Word Bank responded to the COVID-19 induced impacts and the 2008 food 
crisis. The World Bank is thus comparatively well placed to respond from that perspective and is making use of the 
agility in accordance with Paragraph 12 Section III of the World Bank Policy and the instructions: Preparation of 
Investment Project Financing “Preparation of Investment Project Financing - Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance 
or Capacity Constraints (Other Procedures Selected Expenditures Proposed to be Financed under the Loan – (3) Food 
Expenditures).The proposed project is designed to make use of existing channels (government and private sector) to 
avoid disrupting and displacing the private sector. 
 
38. 
The proposed project will also include activities to contribute directly to strengthening the capacities and 
systems that would inform more efficient future responses to crises. The responses will be in line with seeking options 
to protect the poor and vulnerable from negative coping mechanisms while helping to secure access to affordable basic 
food commodities. They would also contribute to strengthening institutional capacity in the relevant government 
agencies, with a focus on social protection delivery system, food stock management, and other technical and fiduciary 
oversight capacity enhancements. 
 
39. 
The project is further complementary to additional operations under preparation for financing by other 
development partners, including the European Union, the United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund 
(UNICEF), the WFP6, and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). The social protection strategy 
led by MASS provides a framework for all the partners to provide support in accordance with their mandates. In 
addition to the ongoing collaboration through lending and technical assistance, MASS is also currently commissioning 
a mapping of productive inclusion activities that are supported and implemented by different institutions with the 
objective of promoting harmonization to reduce fragmentation and related inefficiencies in the social protection 
sector. 
 
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
 
40. 
The project builds on the lessons learned from the World Bank’s response to the 2008 global food and financial 
crisis. It also draws from the most recent COVID-19 response globally and across the MENA countries. The following 
lessons are found to be pertinent to the proposed project design. 
 
41. 
Cash transfers are effective at mitigating the impacts of crises on basic consumption needs for the poor and 
vulnerable and reduce the adverse impacts of crises among the target households. The programs are being 
 
6 The WFP supports the MASS by providing food aid to 800-900 refugees exclusively through cash transfers via SCOPE cards, through a 
project financed by the European Union. It has also contributed to the financing of the new MASS Social Protection Strategy, currently 
under preparation. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17  
     
 
increasingly used across several countries irrespective of income levels. For Djibouti, the proposed project builds on 
lessons from the response to the 2008 food and financial crises and the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic response. The 
emergency response thus builds on the national systems and mechanisms developed by the Djiboutian government 
with the support from the World Bank under the ongoing PITCH project. Supporting national systems and programs is 
critical to ensuring sustainability and lasting impact by reducing fragmentation and boosting institutional capacity. 
 
42. 
With respect to the emergency safety nets transfers in particular, cash transfers were deemed efficient and 
scalable to reach the poor and vulnerable households that are hit by shocks when the World Bank supported 
government response to COVID-19. Cash transfers are delivered with ease and minimum logistics especially where 
beneficiary households have accounts in financial institutions. Unless there are locations in rural localities where local 
markets do not facilitate access to desired basic food commodities, in which case food portions can be provided, cash 
transfers are an effective mechanism to supporting the poor and vulnerable in the crises. 
 
43. 
Building a national social safety nets system that is fully functional, adaptive, and robust is key to effective 
implementation and sustainability. The project will benefit from the social registry developed and housed at the MASS, 
it needs to be further strengthened by creating synergies with other ministries and agencies that provide support to 
poor and vulnerable households, namely ADDS and CPEC, and by digitizing the service delivery model for better 
monitoring and delivery of safety nets. This will also strengthen the system’s resilience to future shocks and disasters.  
 
44. 
Livelihoods strengthening investments such as productive inclusion and training, coaching, and mentoring in 
soft and technical skills can contribute to community resilience by building sustainable livelihoods. Cash transfers 
contribute to consumption smoothing and enable household to obtain basic needs and reduce extreme poverty. Global 
evidence also suggests that when complemented with livelihoods strengthening services, the investments have 
potential to help the poor and vulnerable move out of poverty and graduate from programs. In the crises periods, the 
complementarity of both transfers and livelihood services in form of building soft skills for the poor and providing them 
with livelihood grants have potential to enhance recovery from the emergency among the target households.

A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
45. 
The implementing agency for the proposed project is the MASS. The implementation and funds flow 
arrangements for the social protection interventions will follow the established delivery systems for the World Bank 
supported social protection programs that are currently implemented satisfactorily. A project implementation team is 
established at the MASS. Delegated responsibilities for project implementation at the ADDS, local government levels 
at the province, sub province, and community administration levels are also in place and memoranda of understanding 
for delegated responsibilities are updated from time to time based on need. 
 
46. 
To enhance the digitization of safety nets transfers and promote productive inclusion, MASS is collaborating 
with the CPEC to facilitate safety nets beneficiaries’ access to credit and savings services by opening bank accounts 
through which households will receive their transfer payments. This arrangement is solely implemented in Djibouti 
Ville. Efforts will be made under the current project to develop and implement a scale-up plan that is aimed at 
facilitating further the roll out of the safety nets beneficiary access to CPEC services as well as the savings and credit 
schemes that will be supported in terms of capacity building and systems strengthening as part of this project. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18  
     
 
47. 
The in-kind transfers will follow similar delivery arrangement as cash transfers. A system for in-kind transfers 
through delivery of emergency food support to the poor and vulnerable affected by the crises has been implemented 
at the MASS for several years now in response to past crises. In-kind transfers are procured locally, stored in rented or 
government stores and distributed under the supervision of the MASS teams with support of local government teams 
and community groups. The MASS will therefore have procurement, storage, delivery and fiduciary responsibilities and 
capacity development will be supported to build more efficiency in the delivery systems. 
 
48. 
The existing Project Operations Manual (POM) of the ongoing World Bank supported PITCH project will be 
updated and where necessary complemented with specific guidelines to implement the proposed emergency project. 
In addition, the MASS will hire additional capacity and undertake quick capacity enhancements among the current staff 
to facilitate efficient implementation. 
 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
 
49. 
The project Results Monitoring, and Evaluation (RME) arrangements will be managed by the MASS and the latter 
will hire technical support from individuals and firms as deemed appropriate. The RME arrangements will include a 
regular monitoring through the project Results Framework (RF), Iterative Beneficiary Monitoring as well as additional 
performance assessments that will be considered appropriate for determining implementation progress, ascertaining 
results and challenges together with recommendations for addressing the challenges. 
 
50. 
The RF will include indicators to ascertain progress toward achievement of the PDO, and intermediate indicators 
to monitor implementation progress across all project components during the life cycle of the project. Furthermore, 
the emergency cash transfer program will benefit from Iterative Beneficiary Monitoring (IBM) to identify the emerging 
needs and evaluate the effectiveness of the program. Developed by the World Bank Poverty Global Practice, the IBM 
offers an innovative, low-cost method to assess project implementation, increase beneficiary engagement, and 
enhance ascertainment of project results. The approach, which relies on mobile phone and face-to-face interviews 
using small samples, has proven to offer valuable and timely feedback to project managers. The approach will be used 
to rapidly monitor vulnerability of beneficiaries, assess the functionality of the social protection scheme, and allow for 
fast responses where needs arise. 
 
C. Sustainability 
 
51. 
Sustainability of emergency safety nets transfers. The emergency safety nets transfer component builds on 
the PITCH project that is an integral part of the GoD’s PNSF. For existing beneficiary households, arrangements were 
made under the PITCH to gradually increase domestic safety nets funding as the World Bank support reduces. With 
respect to the beneficiary households that are targeted due to the impact of the crisis, the stipulated period of 
emergency support is expected to give them adequate cushion against crisis impacts. In addition, sustainability is 
promoted through Component 2 activities particularly those related to the development of mechanisms to link social 
protection to disasters so that future responses will be predictable, and their risks mitigated through adaptive social 
protection systems. Furthermore, the one-off livelihoods grants will help the poor and vulnerable households with 
opportunities to try and test ideas for subprojects that can help households unleash their productive potential for 
recovery and resilience. 
 
52. 
Sustainability of the Resilience strengthening activities. Building resilience is a process and support through 
the proposed project will provide a contribution to it. Activities for community resilience shall be implemented in 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 19  
     
 
close collaboration with the local governments and mainstreaming the activities and assets created into local 
government budgeting and planning processes will be promoted. In addition, to sustain social economic engagement 
at the community level, the project will invest in community resilience through funding one off grants individuals or 
groups to complement household level support with community livelihoods subprojects that help the households find 
solutions to common emergency social economic problems at locality levels. This support is expected to improve 
likelihood that communities will be more financially empowered through acquiring skills and knowledge and 
implementation of income generating as well as livelihoods strengthening activities.

A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis 
 
53. 
The proposed project aims to shield households from further vulnerability and contribute to the reduction in 
poverty rate and gap in Djibouti. The high growth rate Djibouti sustained in recent years is likely to have had a poverty-
reducing effect. However, the COVID-19 pandemic, which slowed growth and increased vulnerability, has slowed the 
poverty reduction rate. According to recent forecasts based on various scenarios of food price inflation, poverty 
headcount would be expected to increase from its projected 2021 level between 0.3 to 3.1 percentage points. The 
poverty analysis shows that poorer households, who spend a larger proportion of their total household expenditure on 
food are amongst the worst hit and require emergency assistance. 
 
Figure 2: Poverty Trends  
 
Note: Projections based on team calculations and household budget survey (EDAM 2017) and available 
macroeconomic projections, and various inflationary scenarios. The analysis assumes no social protection. 
 
54. 
Over the past five years, Djibouti has observed remarkable growth, albeit slowed down by the COVID-19 
pandemic. Current simulations of poverty, based on existing growth and inflation figures, suggest that poverty among 
Djiboutians was on a downwards trend before COVID-19 hit. Under the current projections of a real GDP growth per 
capita of 1.8 percent in 2022, the poverty headcount ratio is forecast to continue to remain at a projected level of 17.1 
percent as in 2021. This decline is slower than in pre-pandemic years. However, the current analysis presents 4 
hypothetical scenarios around food and non-price inflation. Should price inflation be higher than the currently 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 20  
     
 
projected inflation, poverty is forecast to increase from its 2021 projected level. Specifically, if food prices increase at 
higher rate (10 percent) than non-food prices (3.4 percent) poverty rate is expected to increase to 17.6 percent in 2022, 
and to 17.8 percent should non-food prices also increase at a higher rate than currently projected. Should food prices 
rise even further, e.g., to 30 percent, poverty rates may return to close to their 2017 levels, potentially reversing several 
years of decrease in poverty. 
 
Figure 3: Household Spending (by Decile) 
 
 
55. 
The emergency cash transfer project is expected to provide poor and vulnerable households affected by the 
crisis in Djibouti with at least DJF 10,000 (approximately US$56) monthly to counter the ramifications of the crisis. For 
the poor households this provides a considerable and necessary safety net. Figure 3 shows that the poorest two deciles 
of the population, spent around 23 thousand DJF per month (for the poorest decile), and 42 thousand DJF per month 
(for the second poorest decile), in 2017 as per the household budget survey. For those households, food expenditure 
represents more than half of their monthly expenditures, while it represents 35 percent of that of the richest 
households. Based on a potential 30 percent increase in food prices, and 5 percent increase in non-food prices, the 
estimates suggest that poor households in Djibouti may experience a 20 percent reduction in their purchasing power. 
Therefore, the monthly cash transfer would help smooth their consumption during the crisis period and buffer the 
price shocks, especially for households who are not the beneficiaries of any cash transfer or covered by social 
protection programs. 
 
Figure 4: Households Expenditure (Monthly by Decile) 
 
Note: Team’s calculations based on the Household Budget Survey (EDAM 2017) 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 21  
     
 
B. Fiduciary 
 
Financial Management 
 
56. 
The Financial Management assessment (FM) already completed for the ongoing PITCH project, was updated 
for this project. The updated assessment concluded that with the implementation of agreed-upon actions, the 
proposed FM arrangements would satisfy the minimum requirements under paragraph 12 of the World Bank Policy on 
Investment Project Financing and per the World Bank FM guidance on Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies. Due 
to the project’s urgency, the FM approach was streamlined based on simplified ex-ante requirements while relying 
more heavily on ex-post requirements as additional fiduciary controls. MASS will implement the envisaged project 
using the existing implementation arrangements for the PITCH project. The FM arrangement is adequate and FM risk 
is rated Substantial. Based on the available information, the primary FM arrangements will include: 
• 
The financial officer of the ongoing PITCH project will manage the FM and disbursement functions of the 
envisaged project. 
• 
MASS’ management information system will be used for the cash transfer component, but it will be subject to 
Information Technology (IT) technical audit to a reasonable assurance over the systems’ infrastructures, 
policies, and operations, IT controls, and data integrity, as well as overall business and financial controls. 
• 
Cash transfers for beneficiaries in the urban areas will only be made through financial institutions based on 
poverty eligibility criteria; however, the mechanics of the cash transfers for beneficiaries in the rural areas are 
still not yet developed and agreed with MASS. Using telecom companies/e-wallets for cash transfers or 
financial institution mobile team in rural areas could be an option. 
• 
The updated POM and the procurement plan will provide guidance to recruit an independent verification 
agency to verify that all conditions have been met, eligible beneficiaries were paid, and the beneficiaries have 
received their respective cash transfers. The verification will be carried out twice a year and depending on the 
report findings the frequency could be revised to one report per year. This verification is consistent with the 
current initiative for undertaking technical audits of cash transfers at the PITCH for which the first report was 
produced in February 2022 and deemed systems for cash transfers satisfactory. MASS is expected to plan and 
implement the requirement in time. 
• 
The POM will be developed to include the FM procedures for the sub-grants to households, the cash and in-
kind transfers procedures, the project FM and disbursement arrangements and procedures. 
• 
The project Designated Account (DA) denominated in US Dollars will be opened at a commercial bank in 
Djibouti acceptable to the World Bank. Payments and withdrawal of eligible expenditures accompanied by 
statements of expenditures statement and proper documentation will be processed in accordance with the 
applicable procedures and the World Bank's disbursement arrangements detailed in the disbursement and 
financial information Letter (DFIL). The disbursement method is detailed in the DFIL and includes advance and 
direct payment. 
• 
The accounting system used for the going project PITCH will be used for the envisaged project. 
• 
Simplified and streamlined interim un-audited financial reports will be submitted with an extended coverage 
period of three months. The report will include the statement of sources and use of funds, the use of funds by 
project component and disbursement categories, and the DA reconciliation statement. 
• 
An independent private sector audit firm will audit the project’s financial statements annually according to the 
Terms of Reference (ToR) agreed upon with the World Bank. 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 22  
     
 
 
57. 
The details of the Financial Management Assessment are included in Annex 2. 
 
Procurement 
 
58. 
Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF 
Borrowers for Goods, Works, Non-Consulting and Consulting Services, dated November 2020 (‘Procurement 
Regulations’). The project will be subject to the World Bank’s “Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and 
Corruption in projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants”, October 15, 2006, revised in January 2011, 
and as of July 1, 2016. The project will use the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) to plan, record, 
and track procurement transactions. 
 
59. 
 he simplified procurement procedures for ‘Situations in  rgent  eed of  ssistance or  apacity  onstraints’ 
described under paragraph 12 of Section III of the IPF Policy will be applicable to fast-track project procurement. 
Those would include: (a) direct selection, as appropriate; (b) increased thresholds for requests for quotations; (c) 
selection of consulting firms using Consultant’s Qualification-based Selection (CQS); (d) streamlined competitive 
procedures with shorter bidding time; and (e) no standstill period.  
 
60. 
MASS will be the project implementing agency with full fiduciary responsibility (including community driven 
activities) leveraging on its existing arrangements for implementation of the active PITCH project. ADDS, as public 
semiautonomous agency under umbrella of MASS will provide technical support for the implementation of community-
based activities. MASS has a procurement officer working as a consultant for coordinating procurement related 
activities and reporting. He gradually developed his capacity to manage procurement under World Bank financed 
projects. 
 
61. 
Procurement scope, Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) and procurement plan. The 
project includes a portion of financing of emergency safety nets cash transfers and meal vouchers to students at schools 
which are deemed not procurement related. A similar approach is being implemented by the current active project 
managed by the MASS. In areas where these transfers are not possible due to non-functioning market and access to 
food using vouchers is highly constrained, MASS will procure these foods locally and then distribute them to targeted 
beneficiaries by MASS's local offices. With a rate of US$73 per household per month for 10,000 households and food 
quantities packaged per quarter. It is estimated that procurement contracts will represent about US$2,190,000 
comprising different eligible commodities (rice, flour, pasta, sugar, and oil). MASS will conduct market analysis for food 
commodities based on its experience in procurement and distribution of food and then propose the most suitable 
procurement approaches and packaging for this acquisition in the context of the emergency. Competitive procurement 
should be used to the extent possible and direct selection only when justified to meet immediate emergent 
requirements. It is, however, envisioned that procurement would privilege the local market. This information should 
be reflected in PPSD to be prepared by MASS and agreed upon by the World Bank within the first month after project 
effectiveness. 
 
62. 
Community associations at village level will receive a sub-grant after meeting eligibility criteria set out in the 
POM. The associations will be responsible for selecting the subproject type from a menu of options and carrying out 
the subproject, including procurement through simplified procurement procedures for community-driven 
development programs. Community associations are organized in committees comprising a chair, a secretary, and an 
accountant. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 23  
     
 
 
63. 
Within the remaining financing envelope under component 2 and component 3, procurement activities will 
include consultant services for capacity building for emergency response and resilience, project coordination, monitoring 
and evaluation; and scaling up digitalization of the safety nets social registry and some goods (including vehicles) and 
equipment for project management needs and small works. These procurements are included in a simplified 
procurement plan prepared by MASS as part of appraisal. A simplified PPSD should also be finalized at an early stage of 
project implementation. 
 
64. 
The main Procurement risks identified at this stage of project preparation are: (i) absence of World Bank’s 
acceptable procurement documents for commodities; (ii) highly volatile prices due to high global demand and supply 
shortages of commodities; (iii) lack of familiarity of streamlined procurement procedures for emergency operations; (iv) 
delays in procurement processing due to low threshold of oversight (DJF 5 million equivalent to US$0.028 million) by the 
national procurement commission and contract award requiring many signatures while implementing emergency 
project; and (v) limited capacity of communities to process and manage subprojects, including with regard to fairness 
and transparency of processes as well as controls mechanism and records keeping. To mitigate these risks, the following 
measures are envisioned: (i) MASS’ procurement document for supply of commodities will be reviewed by the World 
Bank for acceptability to incorporate as a minimum the World Bank’s specific requirements relating to eligibility, Conflict 
of Interest , Fraud and Corruption and right to audit and any other requirement that the World Bank considers necessary; 
(ii) MASS will be responsible for ensuring price reasonableness in comparison with prevailing market prices and the World 
Bank will confirm that prices are consistent with the market prices; (iii) hands-on support to MASS by the World Bank 
with emphasis on procurement flexibilities available in procurement regulations; (iv) MASS to anticipate procurement 
processing and advocate national procurement commission to give priority to emergency aspects of the project in 
procurement reviews and approvals; and (v) MASS (with ADDS’ technical support) to enhance their hands-holding to 
communities for implementation and reporting of community-driven activities. 
 
65. 
The residual risk is assessed as Substantial after the implementation of the mitigation measures proposed above 
and taking into consideration the relative complexity and price volatility when procuring food commodities in this period 
of disruption of supply chain. 
 
66. 
The World Bank’s oversight of procurement will be carried out through increased implementation support, and 
increased procurement post review based on a 20 percent sample. Prior review requirements by the World Bank will 
apply to procurement of food commodities by MASS. 
 
67. 
Record keeping and asset management. MASS will be responsible for maintaining (i) procurement documents 
for the entire procurement processing and contract execution; and (ii) detailed records of assets and inventory to ensure 
that purchased assets are safeguarded. 
 
C. Legal Operational Policies 
 
. 
. 
Triggered? 
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 
No 
Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 
No 
. 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 24  
     
 
D. Environmental and Social 
 
68. 
The Environmental and Social risks (E&S) are assessed as moderate. The activities supported by the project are 
not expected to have significant negative environmental impacts. No large rehabilitation or construction of infrastructure 
or other actions having significant impact on the environment will be financed through this operation. The key risks 
associated with the project include the risks of elite capture, potential exclusion of vulnerable and disadvantaged groups 
from the benefits offered by the project. They will be easily mitigated through the project design and the actions outlined 
in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and other safeguards documents. Other risks include social discontent, the 
risk of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) and the exposure to and propagation of COVID-
19 virus. The project will also generate risks associated with minor civil works such as occupational and community health 
and safety risks. The project has been screened for sexual abuse and exploitation and sexual harassment. These risks 
have been rated as moderate.

69. 
Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project 
supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level Grievance Mechanisms (GM) or the 
World Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed to 
address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the 
World Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines 
whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of World Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and 
the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address 
complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been 
brought directly to the attention of World Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity 
to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s GRS, please visit 
http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s Accountability 
Mechanism, please visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.

ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan 
 
COUNTRY: Djibouti  
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project 
 
Implementation Arrangements 
 
1. 
The proposed project is an integral part of the concerted World Bank support to the GoD’s crisis emergency 
response program. The program and the World Bank support project will be implemented by the MASS as the main 
implementing agency. MASS will have responsibility for the implementation of the whole project.  
 
2. 
Steering Committee. A Government Steering Committee led by the MASS and drawing on active participation of 
other key relevant line ministries has been established and will provide strategic guidance and advise to the overall 
response. 
 
3. 
Project Management Unit. The implementation and funds flow arrangements for the project will follow the 
established delivery systems for the PITCH operation currently implemented satisfactorily. For the implementation of the 
PITCH operation, a project implementation team is established at the MASS and similar arrangement are already in place 
for community-driven development activities at the ADDS. Delegated responsibilities for project implementation at the 
local government levels at the province, sub province, and community administration levels are also in place. As part of 
the project implementation team, MASS will delegate or hire staff with technical skills in the areas of project coordination, 
field operations management, financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, grievance redress 
mechanism, environmental and social safeguards, and communications. 
 
4. 
CPEC’s Role. To enhance the digitization of safety nets transfers and promote productive inclusion, MASS is 
collaborating with the CPEC to facilitate safety nets beneficiaries’ access to credit and savings services by opening bank 
accounts through which households will receive their transfer payments. This arrangement is solely implemented in 
Djibouti Ville. Efforts will be made under the current project to scale plan aimed at facilitating further the roll out of the 
safety nets beneficiary access to CPEC services. 
 
5. 
Inter-agency collaboration. Because of the multisectoral nature of the proposed project, the MASS will develop 
collaboration framework arrangements with line ministries and other relevant institutions. The framework will be put in 
place to clarify the roles and responsibilities of each institution, lay out the technical and contractual requirements for 
food import purchases, and set the rules for pricing and payments. 
 
Implementation Support Plan 
 
6. 
The implementation support plan takes into consideration: (i) the nature of the project and its implementation 
arrangements; (ii) the fact that the proposed project is an emergency operation which requires timely implementation 
with a shorter time span; and (iii) the capacity requirements relative to the Djibouti context and project complexity. In 
addition, the support plan takes into consideration the requirements for inter-institutional and inter-agency coordination 
between the MASS and Ministry of Trade and Tourism. 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 36  
     
 
Table 1.2. Main Areas of Focus for Support to Project Implementation 
Time 
Focus areas 
Skills required 
First 18 
months 
Coordination, management, and oversight  
Senior Social Protection Specialist 
Safety nets and delivery systems  
Social Protection Specialist, Operations 
Officer  
 
 
FM and FM Control 
FM Specialist  
Contracting and contract management  
Procurement Specialist  
E&S Safeguards  
E&S Specialists  
Results, monitoring and evaluation  
M&E Specialist, Economist  
Communications and behavior change  
Social Specialist, Communications 
Specialist  
 
 
 
18–48 
months 
Same as above 
Same as above  
 
 
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Social Protection Emergency Crisis Response Project (P178992) 
 
 
 
 
Page 37