[FILTERED: FCV-relevant sections only. Original length: 120000 chars → Filtered: 102011 chars (15.0% reduction). Sections kept: I–V (full), VI E/F/G (social/env/GRM), Annexes 1, 3, 7.]

A. Country Context 
 
Regional context 
 
1. The Horn of Africa (HoA) region, comprising Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, and Somalia is important from a 
population, economic and geographical lens. It has a total area of around 2.5 million square kilometers, a 
population of about 184 million (with a substantial number of youth) – expected to reach 250 million by 2030, 
and a combined Gross Domestic Product (GDP) estimated at US$170 billion. The economies of the region are 
among the fastest growing economies not only in Africa, but in the world, with the exception of Somalia. 
Approximately 70 percent of the population live in rural areas and exhibit varying levels of poverty ranging from 
68.6 percent in Somalia to 17.0 percent in Djibouti (Table 1).  
 
Table 1: HOA Socio-Economic Indicators 
Country 
Population 
Growth 
(Annual %) 
Youth 
population 
(14-21 
years) % 
GDP 
per 
Capita 
(US$ 2019 
Current) 
GDP 
Growth 
(2019 
Annual 
%) 
Poverty 
Headcount 
at 
US$1.9/day  
Human 
Development 
Index 
(HDI) 
(2020 ranking 
out of 189) 
Djibouti 
1.5 
20.6 
3,414.9 
7.8% 
17.0% 
166 
Eritrea 
1.9 
19.0 
642.5 
8.7% 
- 
180 
Ethiopia 
2.5 
21.5 
855.8 
8.4% 
30.8% 
173 
Kenya 
2.5 
20.1 
1,816.5 
5.4% 
37.1% 
143 
Somalia 
2.9 
19.9 
320.0 
-1.5% 
68.6% 
N/A 
Source: World Bank Data Indicators available at data.worldbank.org; HDI data from UNDP (2020). 
 
2. The HoA has a favorable geo-strategic position that adjoins the Red Sea, the Arabian Sea, the Indian Ocean, and 
the Gulf, with important regional and international connection implications as a gateway to Africa, Europe, the 
Middle East, and Asia. There is considerable potential for the HoA to grow and transform its economy and deliver 
development results for its people. Given its locational and demographic advantages, the region is well positioned 
to supply itself, neighboring countries in the continent, the economies of the Gulf and South Asia, and the 
developed world with agricultural, agro-processed, and light manufactured products. It can also suitably position 
itself as a transit hub for major trade connections, and benefit from the opportunities that those present. 
3. The HoA is known for a long history of fragility, catastrophic events (particularly droughts), and seemingly 
intractable conflicts. A complex set of historical, ideological, political, economic, geographical, territorial, and 
environmental factors have created tensions within and between states, at times boiling over into inter- and intra-
state violent conflicts. These conflicts have, in turn, further weakened states’ capacity to provide public services, 
social cohesion, and further increased the vulnerability of its population (particularly in historically marginalized 
border areas), thereby increasing the risk of future conflicts. Climate change is now exacerbating an already 
difficult situation, leading to increased tension over natural resources. Successive shocks of different kinds have 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 72  
     
 
led to record numbers of displaced people and increased migration, mostly irregular, to Gulf countries (World 
Bank, 2021)1.  
4. Yet, the true picture of the HoA is more nuanced, and HoA countries could unlock significant common economic 
opportunities. Cities and towns across the HoA are growing, increasing the demand for food. The growth in urban 
incomes is increasing demand for higher-value foods, including processed foods and animal products, with the 
potential to benefit rural producers and create jobs across the agri-food value chains. The growth of secondary 
cities attracts service providers that can provide jobs for those migrating from rural areas and deliver services 
supporting the growth of off-farm employment in rural areas.  There is strong demand from the Gulf for some 
products produced in the region, in particular, meat and other agricultural products. There is considerable 
potential for enhanced cross-border trade, which is intrinsically transnational but mainly small-scale (informal) in 
the HoA, with significant potential to leverage entrepreneurship and greater private sector activity to generate 
jobs (World Bank 2021). 
5. Poverty and inequality remain significant challenges in the HoA, though there has been improvement. The 
ongoing pandemic crisis is projected to have a significant impact on reversing gains in poverty reduction – with 
Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) likely to see between 25 to 40 million people being pushed into poverty as per latest 
World Bank (WB) estimates as a result of the Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. Vulnerability 
remains a key challenge and a driver of fragility due to conflict, natural disasters and shocks (including climate-
change linked ones), and other household and community level vulnerability factors. The HoA faces additional 
development challenges: (i) maintaining strong growth and stable macroeconomic fundamentals; (ii) addressing 
competitiveness, infrastructure connectivity and investment climate; (iii) dealing with historical deficits in human 
development; (iv) addressing inequality and exclusion; and (v) promoting peace, stability and cooperation in the 
region.  
6. Trade is underperforming as a driver of growth, job creation and poverty reduction in the region. The ratio of 
(recorded) trade to GDP decreased between 2013 and 2019 in Ethiopia, Kenya, and Djibouti. However, compared 
to its neighboring countries in the region, Djibouti trade plays a critical role in the economy. 
Figure 1: Trade as a percentage of GDP for different countries (2013 and 2019) 
 
Source: World Bank 2021, “Horn of Africa Regional Economic Memorandum” 
 
 
1 World Bank 2021, “Horn of Africa Regional Economic Memorandum.” 
348
41
53
50
165
367
130
298
29
33
50
210
319
124
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Djibouti
Ethiopia
Kenya
Somalia
Vietnam
Singapore Cambodia
Trade (% of GDP)
2013
2019
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 72  
     
 
7. Regional integration within the HoA presents a compelling case for expanding on the available opportunities, 
while simultaneously addressing some of the challenges. Regional integration can be an engine to accelerate the 
growth and strengthen socio-economic inclusion (in terms of the poverty elasticity of growth) within a context of 
global uncertainties. A 2019 study on the impact of regional integration on inclusive growth found that regional 
corridor interventions tend to benefit economic welfare and equity2. Specifically, overall integration and the 
dimensions of trade and investment, capital markets and finance, and institutional and social inclusion were found 
to be significant and robust drivers of poverty reduction, with an even more pronounced positive impact on lower-
income countries. Integration can promote economic diversification, the competitiveness of countries, and 
greater regional trade. Attention to filling critical regional infrastructure gaps along with ‘soft’ policy and 
regulatory reforms can also propel growth.  
8. Corridor investments in transport connectivity and trade facilitation have been estimated to result in significant 
improvements in income especially in border areas for transport connectivity, and overall, in the region when 
both transport connectivity and trade facilitation measures are implemented (See Figures 2 and 3 below) 
Figure 2: Corridor investments would boost incomes in 
the border areas   
(Welfare impacts of corridor investments vs. baseline, %)  
Source: Herrera Dappe and Lebrand, 2021. 
Figure 3: Incomes in border areas would be higher and 
more widespread if combined with border facilitation 
(Welfare impacts of corridor investments and border 
facilitation vs. baseline, %)  
Source: Herrera Dappe and Lebrand, 2021. 
 
9. The recent dialogue among the government leaders has opened significant opportunities, including joint 
commitment by HoA countries to implement the Horn of Africa Initiative (HoAI). The Governments of the region 
have prioritized the development of regional corridors to enhance economic diversification and trade 
competitiveness, as one of the key pillars of intervention. The HoAI was launched in October 2019 by the Ministers 
of Finance of Djibouti, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya, and Somalia with the support of three Development Partners (DPs): 
the African Development Bank (AfDB), the European Union (EU) and the WB. The initiative calls for investments 
of about US$15 billion over the next decade, by supporting the development of economic corridors (transport, 
energy and digital) and trade, promotion of value-added regional value chains, thus improving human capital and 
 
2 Roberts et al. (2019). Transport corridors and their wider economic benefits available at https://doi.org/10.1111/jors.12467 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 72  
     
 
increasing resilience in the region. Trade facilitation and non-tariff barriers add significantly to trade costs in the 
region (EU, 2020)3. Details of the activities identified under each pillar of the HoAI are provided in Annex 2. 
Figure 4: Priority corridors of the HoAI 
 
Source: World Bank  
10. The Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor Project is the second in a Series of Projects (SOP). This SOP consists of 
a series of interdependent projects to support the HoAI involving multiple borrowers, all of which will need to 
participate for the program’s objectives to be achievable. The first operation under the SOP was the Kenya Horn 
 
3 Desiderio & Alikhani (2020). “Trade integration and facilitation reforms in the Horn of Africa and way forward.” EU Report 23/11/2020 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 72  
     
 
of Africa Gateway Development Project4. Preparations are underway for subsequent operations in the SOP with 
the Republic of Somalia5 and the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia6. Annex 3 provides further details on 
the business case for improving this corridor. Also, in terms of regional integration as supported by the African 
Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), the Djibouti-Addis road and transit corridor 
might be considered as a critical portion of a potential longer and deeper road and transit corridor reaching out 
South Sudan and then the Central African region and Sahel countries. This would position Djibouti as a major port 
of transit for the entire Eastern and Central Africa region. 
Country context 
11. Djibouti is a small, highly urbanized, lower-middle-income economy that is highly dependent on its integration 
with the HoA. The country covers an area of 23,200 square kilometers and is home to about one million people. 
The size of Djibouti’s economy limits its ability to diversify and increases its reliance on foreign markets, making it 
more vulnerable to market downturns. The country does not have significant natural resources, and arid climatic 
condition means agriculture offers limited potential for growth.  Djibouti is thus, completely dependent on imports 
to meet its food needs.  
12. Rapid and sustained economic growth has accelerated in recent years, thanks to large public investments in 
transport and port infrastructure - activities that leverage the country’s geostrategic location. Between 2016-
2019, GDP growth averaged 7 percent while GDP per capita growth averaged 6.8 percent7. However, the country 
has little diversification in its economy and growth has been driven largely by high debt-financed investment, 
estimated at 57 percent of GDP. In addition to the debt financing, Foreign Direct Investments inflows play a key 
role in enhancing growth, contributing to 5.8 percent of GDP between 2015-2019. Like most parts of SSA, this 
growth has not been inclusive – with a prevailing high level of extreme poverty. According to the 2019 Djibouti 
Poverty Assessment survey, 17 percent of the population live on less than US$1.90 per day (in 2011 purchasing 
power parity terms). Majority of its working-age population is either unemployed, informally employed, or out of 
the labor force with unemployment standing as high as 39 percent. Human capital outcomes are generally very 
low. 
13. The socio-economic situation of women remains challenging, especially in terms of secondary educational 
attainment, income inequality with men in the labor market, and access to inputs when working as a small 
business owner8. In 2019, female labor force participation rate stood at around 50 percent, compared to 69 
percent for men9. 61 percent of women are illiterate10. In the transport and trade sectors, women tend to suffer 
more from lack of information and knowledge about cross border trade regulations and procedures (in a context 
in which cross border areas may play a major role in improving livelihoods of women11). As such, women are 
mostly engaged in the informal sector (as petty traders, working as foods vendors or selling handicrafts). They 
face challenges in accessing jobs, economic opportunities productive resources, and contend with constraints on 
their mobility and on leading income-generating initiatives. Moreover, women may encounter Gender Based 
Violence (GBV) and safety concerns while engaging in cross-border trade. Specific constraints for women’s 
 
4 Project ID P161305 (IDA-67680), approved September 8, 2020 
5 Somalia - Horn of Africa Infrastructure Integration Project (P173119) 
6 Horn of Africa Initiative: Regional Economic Corridor Project (P174485) 
7 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?locations=DJ 
8 United States Agency for International Development (USAID), Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment in Djibouti, 2020. 
9 World Development Indicators. International Labor Organization, ILOSTAT database. Data retrieved on January 29, 2021. 
10 Source:  https://blogs.worldbank.org/arabvoices/women-and-youths-programs-help-djibouti-through-COVID-19 
11 Women Connect, 2021. Commerce à travers les frontières de Djibouti. Online page: https://www.womenconnect.org/web/djibouti/cross-
border-trade/-/asset_publisher/PDQgaBwoh0hJ/content/les-autres-institutions-intervenantes-sur-le-commerce-transfrontalier 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 72  
     
 
entrepreneurship include unequal opportunities and lack of managerial trainings12,13. According to the Country 
Partnership Framework (CPF), “the number of women in non-traditional programs and courses continues to be 
small,” and this may be particularly relevant as transport and road construction tend to be a male-dominated 
sector14. Increasing female labor-force participation would boost regional GDP in MENA15 - this also applies in 
Djibouti. This is of critical importance as the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic disproportionally socio-economically hit 
women. The project aims to tackle the gender gap related to female labor force participation and working 
conditions by improving their access to information and knowledge on border trade regulations and procedures 
for their small businesses, promoting childcare center at the border area (to enable time constraint parents to 
engage in cross-border trade), and supporting the creation of small businesses in selected areas based on 
established criteria along the corridor.  
14. The country remains fragile and vulnerable to shocks, even after exiting the Fragility, Conflict and Violence (FCV) 
Harmonized List in Fiscal Year 2021 (FY21)16. Weak institutional capacity has so far limited the Government’s 
ability to design and implement strong public policies which has affected the level of governance improvements 
needed to create an enabling environment for private sector development. Djibouti ranks below the average 
International Development Association (IDA) countries on rule-based governance, quality of public administration, 
transparency, and accountability. It is ranked 142 out of 179 countries in the 2020 Transparency International’s 
Corruption Perceptions Index and 24 out of Africa’s 37 IDA eligible countries in the 2020 Country Policy and 
Institutional Assessment (CPIA). The fragility in the HoA spills into Djibouti, by serving as a major destination for 
refugees and migrants fleeing political and environmental crises. These refugees typically settle in poor areas, 
where their presence tends to worsen the already challenging prevailing conditions there.  
15. The COVID-19 pandemic is having significant impact on the Djiboutian economy. As of September 18, 2021, the 
country had tested more than 12,976 confirmed cases and administered 66,010 COVID-19 vaccine doses. The 
socioeconomic impact of the crisis is particularly devastating as the pandemic has contributed to worsening the 
already precarious living conditions of vulnerable households with job loss, price shocks and other adverse factors. 
COVID-19 is reversing fiscal consolidation efforts started in 2015 and is having severe spillover effects on the 
Government’s fiscal situation. The overall fiscal deficit is expected to increase to 2.3 percent of GDP, up from 0.5 
in 2019 due to the fall in total revenue and COVID-19 related public expenditure. Thanks to budget support from 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and AfDB, the Central Bank reserve holdings are expected to increase 
slightly to 3.5 months of imports (excluding imports of goods and services related to free zone reexports). In April 
2020, the government of Djibouti (GoD) launched the "Pacte de Solidarité Nationale" a reference document 
framing its socioeconomic response to the pandemic. The "pact" highlights the impact and financing needs of 
three priority sectors: health, social and economic measures. The medium-term economic outlook remains 
positive despite the impact of COVID-19 as growth is expected to average 7.1 percent per year in 2021–202217, 
driven by a rebound in Ethiopia, which will underpin free zone reexports and exports of transportation, logistics, 
and telecommunication services. Infrastructure investments are also expected to boost growth.  
 
12 World Bank. 2017. Progress Towards Gender Equality in the Middle East and North Africa Region. Washington, DC. World Bank. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/28965, and World Bank Group, 2018. Proposed credit for a support for women and 
youth entrepreneurship project. Project Appraisal Document 2831. Washington, D.C. 
13 Atamanov et al. Progress towards gender equality in the Middle East and North Africa, 2017. 
14 World Bank Group, Djibouti CPF 2022-2026, Report No. 147787-DJ, p9.  
15 Middle East and North Africa Regional Gender Action Plan FY18-23. World Bank Group. 2017.  
16 https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/fragilityconflictviolence/brief/harmonized-list-of-fragile-situations 
17 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/djibouti/overview 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 72  
     
 
16. Djibouti is exposed to natural hazards and is already experiencing the impacts of climate change. Djibouti has a 
semi-desert tropical climate and experiences recurring flooding, extreme heat, wildfires, water scarcity with 
extended period of drought. Climate change is projected to continue increasing temperatures, rainfall variability 
and the frequency and intensity of flooding, droughts and wildfire, presenting a threat to food security, water 
resources and sustainable development18,19. Djibouti experiences low adaptive capacity to climate change and 
therefore the country presents a high level of climate vulnerability20. The agriculture sector is underdeveloped, 
and livestock farming is non-commercial; both sectors are heavily impacted by water scarcity and droughts. 
Natural capita, including forests that cover 0.2 percent of the country (2015), will be at risk too. In rural areas, 
96.7 percent of the population lives below the poverty line and climate change will exacerbate fragility. Low-
income populations, like the 17 percent of Djiboutian who live below the extreme poverty line (2019), are also 
vulnerable and lack the capacity to adapt to climate-induced shocks21. Finally, Djibouti, like the rest of Middle East 
and North Africa (MENA), suffers from water insecurity. As highlighted in the WB Beyond Scarcity report22, water 
shortages will reduce MENA’s GDP growth by 6 percent to 14 percent by 2050. Climate change, in short, will 
exacerbate these preexisting vulnerabilities, and amplify fragility. Thus, the impact of Climate change and natural 
disasters are to be taken into account in the selection of construction materials and in adjustments of design 
standards for the project. 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
17. Given its strategic location along a trade route connecting Africa, the Middle East, Europe, and Asia, the 
transportation sector plays a critical role in Djibouti’s economy as a ‘land-linked’ economy. The project’s corridor 
is part of the strategic positioning of Djibouti as a logistic services provider to Ethiopia through the Port of Djibouti, 
and to the other landlocked East African countries. According to a 2019 White Paper23 published by the WB in 
2019, the Port of Djibouti accounted for between 20 and 25 percent of the State’s revenues, while supporting 
6,500 direct jobs (equivalent to approximately 25 percent of the 30,000 private sector jobs in the country), and 
6,000 indirect jobs. The port of Djibouti is located on one of the world's busiest shipping routes and serves as the 
de facto port of entry for Ethiopia. In 2012, the contribution of the transport and telecommunications sector to 
Djibouti's GDP exceeded 27 percent 24. Generally, the contribution of the transport and communication sector in 
other countries does not exceed 10 percent of GDP. The case of Djibouti is therefore quite unique in terms of the 
contribution of the sector. Djibouti's Vision 2035 predicts that the transport sector will still contribute 25 percent 
of GDP in 2035. 
18. In the landlocked country of Ethiopia, regional integration and international connectivity via economic and 
logistics corridors play an essential role in reducing isolation, supporting economic diversification, and 
increasing regional supply-chains efficiency. The growing importance of the industrial and manufacturing sectors 
in the landlocked and densely populated country (112 million inhabitants in 2019) depends on its efficient and 
 
18 
World 
Bank 
Climate 
Change 
Knowledge 
Portal 
consulted 
on 
12 
March 
2021. 
URL: 
https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/country/djibouti/climate-data-projections 
19 According to Djibouti‘s Climate Risk and Adaptation Country Profile, temperatures across the country are projected to increase between 
0.6°C and 2.4°C by 2050. Future precipitation changes remain unclear as multi-model analysis of the Sahel region suggest a drying trend 
while individual models suggest an increase in rainfall. Climate variability and extreme events are project to increase. 
20 ND GAIN Index Consulted on 12 August 2021. URL: https://gain-new.crc.nd.edu/ranking/vulnerability/capacity 
21 Shock Waves: Managing the Impacts of Climate Change on Poverty; Climate Change and Development; World Bank, 2016 
22 World Bank. 2017. Overview  Vol. 2 of Beyond scarcity : water security in the Middle East and north Africa. Washington, D.C. : World 
Bank Group. https://hubs.worldbank.org/docs/imagebank/pages/docprofile.aspx?nodeid=28013785 
23 https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/963231561663013431/pdf/Country-and-Port-Fact-Sheets-and-Projections.pdf 
24 Source: Djibouti Vision 2035   
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 72  
     
 
reliable connectivity with international markets for its inputs and products. To this end, the country has invested 
in logistics and dry ports infrastructure along its corridor with Djibouti. Port of Djibouti currently handles about 95 
percent of Ethiopian imports and exports while the port of Berbera and Port of Sudan handle respectively 3 
percent and 2 percent only.  The recent improvement in port and rail infrastructure in the Djibouti-Addis corridor 
makes it the most attractive corridor for Ethiopian traders.  However, Djibouti’s port and logistics sector will likely 
face additional competition from neighboring countries in the coming decade. Djibouti is a transit-based economy 
that highly depends on the flow of trade with Ethiopia. As Ethiopia seeks to diversify its partners and transit 
corridors and routes, the need for Djibouti to reinforce and maintain its captive demand advantage through a 
good quality transit services have become paramount. 
19. Djibouti is currently outperforming both Eritrea and Somalia in terms of logistics management, as measured by 
the WB’s Logistics Performance Index. However, to maintain its comparative advantage over other corridors, 
particularly those of Berbera and Port of Sudan, it needs to implement reforms that would significantly improve 
revenue mobilization.  While the Djiboutian economy is highly dependent on revenue from port and transit 
services, Ethiopia needs access to reliable and sustainable sea and port services to maintain the momentum of its 
recuperating economy. A business case therefore exists for governments of both countries to rapidly, develop the 
corridor for long-term use (see Annex 3). This will also create a conducive environment for business communities 
to thrive.  
20. Djibouti depends almost completely on imports to meet its food needs and food aid represents almost 10 
percent of total imports.25 Djibouti port services, transportation to and from Addis for transit and trade of goods 
with Ethiopia play a significant role in the country’s economy and social resilience. However, transport 
infrastructure near the coast is vulnerable to flooding and erosion due to storm surges and sea level rise. Road 
infrastructure can also be impacted by flash floods and extreme heat conditions, requiring integration of climate 
considerations in construction and rehabilitation design standards and in road and drainage maintenance 
provisions.  
21. Another project reflecting the ever-increasing investment in the Djiboutian and Ethiopian transportation sector 
is the new regional railway line opened in 2018. The 756 km, standard gauge, single track, electrified and signaled 
railway line links Addis Ababa and the port of Djibouti. At present, technical, operational and policy challenges 
leave the line’s occupancy rate at just 20 percent; far below its potential and represents only 15 percent of trade.  
Djibouti port has launched several upgrades to improve the last mile rail connectivity at the port terminals, yet, 
freight train operations along the line are regularly suspended. This is due to shortage of rolling stock, safety issues 
and power shortages. Once these challenges are addressed and the line used at its full capacity, it is estimated 
that modal shift will be capped at 50 percent of total trade. This will leave an important role to the road transport 
and doesn’t undermine the viability of the road corridor deported by the proposed project. 
22. High-quality roads remain essential for the region as the road corridors carries most of the transit to Ethiopia 
(95 percent). However, infrastructure deficiencies, poor road safety and lack of appropriate maintenance impact 
negatively the efficiency of transport between Djibouti and Addis-Ababa and affects heavily accessibility in 
Djibouti. The road infrastructure along the corridors is in varying conditions with sections of it in deplorable state. 
Moreover, the absence of parking and rest areas along the corridors and the narrow cross section result in 
 
25 Climate Risk and Adaptation Country Profile – Djibouti; GFDRR. URL: https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/climate-
change-country-profile-2011-djibouti.pdf 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 72  
     
 
congestion from parked trucks along the road, breeding road safety hazards. The project will help relieve 
congestion near the port, reduce emissions, reduce the chaotic condition of the truck waiting areas, improve the 
connection to the lagging regions of Djibouti and connectivity to economic opportunities. 
23. There are currently two road corridors in use, namely (i) the Northern Corridor through Galafi border and of a 
total length of 900 km of which 214 km in Djibouti, and (ii) the “Southern Corridor” through Guelileh border of 
a total length of 750 km of which 104 km in Djibouti. The traffic on the Djibouti-Addis corridor is dominated by 
commercial vehicles, with Heavy Vehicles (HVs) and small trucks, bus and coaches making up 88 percent of the 
traffic. The annual total bidirectional traffic is of 3,600 vehicle per day in 2021.The current travel time from Djibouti 
to Addis on the Northern corridor is 3 days, whereas the travel time on the South Corridor is 2.5 days. Road safety 
is a challenge since the two corridors pass through several major cities, leading to risks for the more vulnerable 
users.  
24. Lack of appropriate maintenance of road infrastructure leads to quick deterioration of the road condition 
despite of the existence of a toll. Despite the implementation of an institutional reform that created the Road 
Agency (ADR)26 in 2013, the existence of a US$ 20 toll, and the development of the Djibouti Ports Corridor Road 
SA (DPCR)27 in 2018, the road network suffers insufficient maintenance. Inadequate axle load control means that 
trucks are often overloaded, especially bulk trucks. This leads to a quick deterioration of the road conditions. 
25. In addition to the hard infrastructure deficiencies, the countries’ transit and trade procedures require 
simplification. In 2008, a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between Djibouti and Ethiopia for customs 
transit along the transit corridor was concluded and is currently being implemented. The MoU defines the transit 
modalities, roles and responsibilities, operational processes and procedures, guarantee mode, the legal route and 
legally valid crossing points. The protocol includes the bilateral transit management body including a Permanent 
Joint Commission which meets regularly. The definition of the official transit route is contained in the bilateral 
agreement between the two customs authorities signed in 2008 including the route through Galafi and Guelileh. 
26. Duplicated procedures and lack of interconnectivity between customs management systems affect the efficient 
movement of goods along the Corridor and there are no operational juxtaposed One Stop Border Posts (OSBP) 
for road transport. Djibouti and Ethiopia each use a customs declaration format that is based on international 
standards but is not legally valid within the sovereign territory of the other country. To improve the efficiency of 
transit between Djibouti and Ethiopia, a technical committee has been set up to establish the Single Administrative 
Document (SAD), which allows for the harmonization of customs declaration models and the systematic mutual 
recognition of the document between the two countries. Thus, the transit customs declaration made from Djibouti 
would be valid until the customs office of destination in Ethiopia and vice versa. This will avoid a break in the 
logistical chain at the border crossing for the establishment of a new national transit declaration. The SAD 
 
26 A 2013 decree created the Djibouti Road Agency (ADR) by bringing together the former Directorate of Equipment and the Accounting 
Agency of the Road Maintenance Fund (RMF). The objective of the merger was to help ADR maintain - in addition to Djibouti's urban roads 
- all national roads in Djibouti's territory, i.e. approximately 1,200 kilometers by then under its management, with the sums collected by 
the toll (which were not valued since). 
27 The Decree No. 2018-319/PR/MET of October 28, 2018 grants the exclusive management of the road corridor network to Djibouti Ports 
Corridor Road SA (DPCR), whose purpose is "the rehabilitation, modernization and development of the road corridor network linking the 
ports of the Djibouti Republic to neighboring countries, as well as the extension, maintenance, rehabilitation and commissioning of corridor 
roads " (RN1, RN2, RN5, RN9, RN11, RN17 and RN19), with the exclusive right to collect road fees for traffic on corridor roads, and the 
responsibility to repay loans 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 72  
     
 
template has been prepared according to Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) standards 
and norms in French and English. The interconnection of customs systems for the systematic and automated 
exchange of declaration data has yet to be finalized. 
27. Addressing the above factors of the corridor inefficiencies would allow Djibouti to strengthen its position as a 
regional multimodal transport center and facilitate trade with its main partner. In addition to having a high 
economic benefit, it is estimated that road maintenance could generate several hundreds of low-skilled jobs. This 
is quite a significant number of jobs given the small size of Djibouti’s labor market. In this context, there is also an 
opportunity to (i) involve and incentivize the private sector to ensure a good quality of service for road operations 
and maintenance; (ii) undertake a multimodal strategy and develop logistics services to improve the corridor’s 
performance. This means modern transport and logistics services and better interface between maritime and road 
transport and containerization; (iii) improve transport services performance28; and (iv) better integrate 
landlocked areas. 
28. Road transport has long been identified as a major vector for the propagation of Human Immunodeficiency 
Viruses / Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (HIV/AIDS) along the major transit corridors in Africa and more 
recently COVID-19. While Djibouti and Ethiopia have national HIV/AIDS programs and COVID-19 national 
prevention measures, they do not adequately target transport corridors and cross border issues. This means the 
prevalence of HIV/AIDS among truck drivers remain high and perception of increased risk in COVID-19 
transmission greatly affects international road transport.  A study conducted by IGAD in 2013, revealed that the 
predominant health problems reported by truckers along Djibouti -Addis road corridor are (i) sexually transmitted 
infections (95.2 percent), HIV/AIDS (74.8 percent), and malaria (22.1 percent). Djibouti has recognized the 
importance of transit traffic as a vector for the propagation of HIV/AIDS and COVID-19. Past experience with the 
implementation of a HIV/AIDS component in regional transport project financed by the WB29 has proved that a 
regional approach to the issue can have a substantial impact on reducing the prevalence of the disease and raising 
awareness.  
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives 
 
Relationship to Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 
29. The project supports the World Bank Group (WBG)’s priorities for Djibouti and is aligned with the new CPF. The 
project recognizes the 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) and aligns with the new CPF FY22-2630 approved 
in September 2021. It will deepen the WBG’s engagement to help Djibouti leverage gains from its infrastructure 
investments by creating jobs, improving productivity, enhancing human capital, and strengthening the capacity of 
the state to deliver quality public services. The CPF has two pillars: (i) promoting inclusive private sector-led 
growth job creation and human capital; and (ii) strengthening the role and capacity of the state. The project will 
support both pillars by: (i) creating jobs, supporting private-led growth in the infrastructure sector and all private 
producers by facilitating trade and market access with increased connectivity along the corridor. It will also 
 
28 The World Bank developed a Performance Assessment Framework for Policymakers for trucking that could be used in the project: 
indicators such as the ones presented on page 53 could be adopted by DPCR and the public authorities to track performance and gather 
data.   https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/34204/Trucking-A-Performance-Assessment-Framework-for-
Policymakers.pdf?sequence=4&isAllowed=y  
29 Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transport Facilitation Program 
30 
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/419571633105207198/pdf/Djibouti-Country-Partnership-Framework-for-the-Period-
FY22-FY26.pdf 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 72  
     
 
contribute to increasing human capital through road safety improvement and health-related interventions 
(HIV/AIDS and COVID-19 prevention); and most importantly (ii) increase the quality of transport services along the 
corridor.  
30. The project also supports the GoD second national development plan entitled Djibouti ICI (Inclusion, 
Connectivity, and Institutions) for 2020-2024. The plan seeks to operationalize Djibouti’s Vision 2035 which is the 
country’s overarching long-term vision. The main goal under the first national plan was to upgrade the profile of 
the economy with modernized infrastructure and reform sectors for greater efficiency and effectiveness. Four key 
sectors – transport and logistics, telecommunications/ Information and Communications Technology (ICT), 
tourism, and fishing are targeted. The second plan is based on three strategic pillars: (i) reinforcing social and 
economic inclusion; (ii) implementing structural reforms to enhance connectivity and leverage regional 
integration in logistics, water, energy, telecom/ICT, and transport; and (iii) strengthening public institutions to 
improve service delivery and macroeconomic stability. This second phase is expected to give an enhanced role to 
the private sector.  
Relationship to Regional strategies 
31. The project is aligned with the objectives the HoAI.  Consistent with the 2019 Ministerial Communique launching 
the HoAI31, the goal is to transform the transport and logistics corridors into economic corridors by easing the 
transport of goods and people and providing incentives to stakeholders to trade and engage in various economic 
activities along the corridors and cooperation among the five HoA countries. The project will directly contribute 
to Pillars 1 and 2 of the HoA initiative, namely (i) Pillar 1: “An Interconnected Horn”, that focuses on implementing 
cross-border regional infrastructure projects including transport corridors; and (ii) Pillar 2: “More Trade, More 
Growth, More Jobs”, that focuses on trade and economic integration. Furthermore, the project supports one of 
the four priority corridors of the HoAI. Djibouti-Addis Ababa is an economic corridor of the Regional infrastructure 
network of the HoA.  
32. The project is aligned with the enlarged MENA regional strategy and more specifically with the MENA strategy 
for green, inclusive and sustainable infrastructure. Based on three guiding principles, Smart and Green, Inclusive 
and Sustainable, the MENA Infrastructure Strategy has three pillars: (i) enhance national and regional connectivity 
to integrate regional and global supply chains, (ii) accelerate inclusive transition towards Low Carbon Economy 
and Digital Economy and (iii) strengthen enabling environment and mobilize private sector resources to maximize 
development impacts. The project will support pillars (i) and (iii).  
33. The project is also aligned with the WBG Gender Strategy that emphasizes four objectives: (i) improving human 
endowments; (ii) more and better jobs; (iii) remove barriers to women’s ownership and control of assets; (iv) 
enhance women’s voice and agency and engage men and boys. The MENA Gender Strategy builds on these 
objectives and aims to (i) renew the social contract by tackling constraints to women’s economic opportunities; 
(ii) address gender specific vulnerabilities and create opportunities for economic inclusion; and (iii) identify and 
address specific needs of women and men during recovery and reconstruction phases.32The project will support 
pillars (i) and (ii).  
34. The project also fully supports the first priority of the WBG’s Regional Integration and Cooperation Strategy 
Update33 2021-2023 for Africa: “Connectivity – improve functioning of regional corridors and enhance regional 
transport service markets.” This priority focuses on selected transnational economic corridors where integration 
 
31 Communique of October 2019, following Side Event During the World Bank Annual Meetings 
32 Middle East and North Africa Regional Gender Action Plan FY18-23. World Bank Group. 2017.  
33 Report No 154458. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 72  
     
 
could be realized, and where financing for regional physical infrastructure connectivity would be complemented 
by policy reforms to address barriers to value addition and facilitate greater trade. Such an approach would include 
creating an enabling environment for the private sector to invest along these corridors, thus responding to the 
regional integration priorities of countries and the expectations of the private sector in terms of connecting and 
growing markets. 
35. The proposed project is aligned with the WBG 's twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared 
prosperity in a sustainable manner. The project will lay a foundation for a more integrated economy through 
regional integration and trade facilitation between Djibouti and its neighboring countries especially Ethiopia. It 
aims to reduce the cost of transport and trade which in turn boost the competitiveness of firms and contribute to 
reducing the cost and increasing the accessibility of basic commodities for populations (disproportionately poor) 
in rural areas.  
36. The project is aligned with the WBG‘s Climate Change Action Plan 2021-202534 and with the WB’s Next 
Generation Africa Climate Business Plan35 that highlights the importance and urgency of countries to ramp up 
climate-smart development that addresses climate impacts and manages climate risks. The project aims to 
enhance the climate resilience of road infrastructure in critical sections of the road corridor. Through investments 
in climate resilient infrastructure and appropriate maintenance of assets, the project improves access to goods 
and services to communities, while facilitating the transport of goods from and to the Port of Djibouti for trade 
with Ethiopia. In this way, the project contributes to the climate resilience of communities and of the economy of 
Djibouti. 
37. Ensuring safe, sustainable and resilient transport, safeguarding food and goods supply, and creating jobs are 
part of Pillar III of the WBG COVID-19 response and the Post-COVID Green, Resilient and Inclusive Development 
(GRID) recovery. The GRID approach pursues the twin goals with a long-term sustainability lens. It requires urgent 
investments at scale in all forms of capital (human, physical, natural and social) to address structural weaknesses 
and promote growth.  Transformational actions are needed in several “keystone” sectors — including transport 
systems. In line with the WBG Regional Integration Program adjustments made in response to COVID-19, the 
project will contribute to building back better a resilient transport system, while also mitigating COVID-19 impacts 
by creating short- and longer-term employment opportunities, including infrastructure construction work, which 
is labor-intensive. The project will also reinforce the security of food and goods supply chains at the regional level 
by strengthening Ethiopia connectivity.  
Relationship to other WBG projects  
38. The lending instrument chosen for this project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF) under an SOP approach. 
The SOP consists of a series of interdependent projects to support the HoA Initiative. This interdependent/multiple 
borrower type of SOP aims to achieve benefits that go beyond each country’s boundaries, creating regional public 
goods and generating positive externalities. The SOP’s program objective is presented in Section II.A below. The 
funding requirements of the HoA Initiative are large (see Annex 2) and call for incremental investments and 
mobilization of financing from various sources. The SOP approach is underpinned by the strong dialogue at the 
Ministerial and technical levels under the HoA Initiative which allows for ongoing coordination of engagement 
across all operations. It allows the WB to respond to the specific circumstances in each participating country of 
 
34 World Bank Group. 2021. World Bank Group Climate Change Action Plan 2021–2025: Supporting Green, Resilient, and Inclusive 
Development. World Bank, Washington, DC. © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/35799 License: CC BY 
3.0 IGO 
35 World Bank. 2020. The Next Generation Africa Climate Business Plan: Ramping Up Development-Centered Climate Action. World Bank, 
Washington, DC. © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/34098 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 72  
     
 
the HoA Initiative and the plans of other DPs. For instance, the project will complement interventions funded by 
other partners: The Northern Corridor benefited from rehabilitation of road sections financed by the EU, the Japan 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA), and Saudi funds. The AfDB and IGAD have provided technical assistance 
on the customs and trade is financing the studies architectural designs for a OSBP at the border of Guelileh.  It is 
expected that another equivalent juxtaposed OSBP facility will be constructed on the Ethiopian side of the border 
to streamline border procedures between the two countries. The project interventions will also complement 
interventions under the Trade Facilitation Support Program (IFC) which is supporting Ethiopia to implement the 
second phase of the electronic single Window (eSW), implementation of risk-based, risk-based analysis and 
modernization of customs automated management system. 
39. The proposed project is also informed by a number of analytical exercises. These include: (i) a pre-feasibility 
study of a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) Scheme for the Djibouti-Ethiopian Border Road Corridor (P172970) 
funded by Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) and completed in June 2021; (ii) the Infrastructure 
Sector Assessment Program (“InfraSAP”) for Djibouti (P175364) and (iii) a study on operational railway corridor 
enhancement funded by the Mobility and Logistics Multidonor Trust Fund (MOLO, P172970).

A. Project Development Objective 
 
Program Development Objective 
 
40. The overarching objective of the HoA Program Series of Projects, which the proposed project will contribute to, 
is “enhancing connectivity among the HoA countries and access to seaports; facilitation of domestic and regional 
trade and economic integration, and road safety”. 
 
PDO Statement 
 
41. The Project Development Objective is to improve regional connectivity and enhance logistics efficiency in Djibouti 
along the Djibouti- Addis southern corridor. 
 
PDO Level Indicators  
 
42. The proposed key PDO level indicators are as follows: 
 
• 
Reduction in travel time along the Djibouti southern corridor.  
• 
Reduction in truck border crossing time at Guelileh border post. 
 
43. Key intermediate indicators in the results framework will measure results in terms of kilometers of roads 
rehabilitated, improved climate resilience and road safety along the corridor, employment created for the 
construction and maintenance of the roads, optimization of cross-border facilities, processes and procedures at 
the Djiboutian border, improvement of road maintenance management contracts and improved prevention to 
HIV/AIDS and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) for women along the corridor.  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 72  
     
 
B. Project Components 
 
Component 1: Improvement of infrastructure and introduction of intelligent transportation systems along the 
Djibouti-Addis southern corridor (Cost US$80 million equivalent of which US$60 million from IDA, US$17 million 
from the GoD and US$3 million from the private sector) 
44. This component will improve the road corridor through Output and Performance-based Road Contract (OPBRC) 
which will include rehabilitation works for some sections, introduction of intelligent transport system and the 
maintenance and operation of the corridor including axle load control and road safety.  
45. 1(a): Rehabilitation and upgrade of road sections along the Djibouti-Addis southern corridor and logistics 
infrastructure: This sub-component will finance the rehabilitation of (i) the Djibouti city – Arta section on the RN1 
(21 km) that is on the common path of both Northern and Southern corridors, (ii) RN1/RN5 junction - Ali Sabbieh 
section on the RN5 (12 km) and (iii) Ali Sabbieh - Guelileh section on the RN19 (9km), all with climate resilient 
standards. It will also support the development of climate and natural disaster vulnerability assessment on the 
above sections of the corridor. Works will include drainage facilities and walking infrastructure and crosswalks in 
urban/settlement areas along the corridor. The sub-component will also finance a logistic study and the 
implementation of its recommendations, road safety audits and road safety screening and appraisal tools (RSSAT) 
including: (i) construction of safe, climate resilient and energy-efficient platforms and rest stops for trucks along 
the corridor (location to be confirmed by the logistic study) and the rehabilitation and upgrading of customs check 
posts like PK 51 that could be a priority to enhance the efficiency of the corridor in order to decongestion the port 
of Djibouti36; and (ii) treatment of identified road safety “black spots”. The road safety activities will be based on 
the “safe system approach” comprising of safe road infrastructure along the corridor and the adjacent roads, 
improvement of post-crash response to save lives and awareness raising measures. The road design will embed 
safety features meant to keep the Project Safety Impact (PSI) along the corridor below 137. Consultant services 
will be financed for technical design, supervision of the rehabilitation works, and implementation of the 
Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) instruments including resettlement and the relevant COVID-19 health 
protocols. This sub-component will lead to a reduction of CO2 emissions due to the decrease in fuel consumption 
due to improvements in transport efficiency of trucks that switch from the Northern corridor to the Southern 
corridor as a result of project implementation.  
46. 1(b): Deployment of Integrated Transport Information System (ITIS):  This sub-component will finance the design 
and implementation of a smart corridor through the deployment of ITIS systems aimed at ensuring fluidity of 
freight movement between Djibouti and Ethiopia through simplification of transport administrative processes and 
provision of real-time information to monitor cargo clearance and movement, and safety enhancement measures. 
The system will be included in the OPBRC and will include (i) electronic cargo tracking systems for transit which 
will enable to monitor, in real time, cargo and vehicle movements; (ii) integration of information systems between 
 
36 Climate resilient, energy-efficient trucking platforms and rest areas may include elements of green building design, sustainable 
operations, and renewable energy technologies depending on site conditions. Trucking platforms are part of freight distribution system 
and rest areas offer travelers facilities such as restrooms, commercial services such as gas stations, restaurants, vending machines. These 
facilities require lighting, temperature control, and drainage facilities. Facilities will also serve as shelters against severe weather 
phenomena and constructed to withstand adverse climate impact. Green building design can consider daylighting techniques such as using 
natural light to illuminate interior spaces through the strategic placement of skylights and windows and solar- and battery powered lighting; 
the use of passive solar heating and cooling techniques such as the location of windows, choice of construction materials and buildings 
color, use of shading through vegetation or designed overhangs, etc. Sustainable operations include the use of energy efficient lighting and 
nighttime ventilation. 
37 
PSI 
will 
be 
calculated 
using 
the 
RSSAT 
model 
Version 
June 
22, 
2020. 
(https://worldbankgroup.sharepoint.com/sites/gsg/RoadSafety/Pages/RSSAT.aspx) 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 72  
     
 
road, rail and border control agencies; (iii) X-ray cargo-scanners remote image analysis equipment and systems; 
(iv) traffic safety status and alert report, including during climate-related emergencies; (v) electronic payments for 
the toll; and (vi) installation and interconnection of weighing stations along the corridor (possibly with weigh-in-
motion filter prior to the weighbridge) at key locations (Guelileh-Dewele border) to ensure a real-time statistical 
data in accordance with COMESA regulations on truck load standards.  
47. 1(c): Maintenance and operation of the Djibouti-Addis southern corridor: This sub-component will cover, via the 
existing toll revenue (government contribution), the performance-based maintenance of the corridor road, 
through the OPBRC. It will also include the operation and maintenance (O&M) of the axle load control stations. 
The selected bidder for the OPBRC contract will be requested to invest an amount of US$ 3 million (which is 
equivalent to about a year of maintenance) toward this sub-component as a pilot in the increase of private sector 
participation in the road sector of Djibouti. This investment will be recouped by the private sector from toll 
revenues. 
Figure 5: Sections of roads to be rehabilitated by the project 
 
Source: World Bank  
 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 72  
     
 
Component 2: Improvement of transit services along the Djibouti-Addis southern corridor (Cost US$5 million 
equivalent of which US$5 million from IDA) 
48. Interventions under this component will be designed and implemented in close coordination with the Ethiopian 
customs and will complement activities of other partners including the United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development (UNCTAD), EU, COMESA and Trademark East Africa.  
49. 2(a): Enhancement of Customs Transit Procedures.  This sub-component will support improvement of procedures 
for customs and transit to reduce clearance time at the Djibouti Port and transit time along the corridor.  The sub-
component will include two activities: (i) technical assistance to the Djibouti customs to support operationalization 
of the cross-border harmonization of customs declaration documents between Djibouti and Ethiopia, by 
supporting the interconnection of the two customs systems for an automated and systematic exchange between 
Djibouti and Ethiopia; and (ii) technical assistance to the Djibouti customs to support the operationalization of 
export transit procedures of the Ethiopia-Djibouti Customs Transit Protocol Agreement to support the 
implementation of the export transit regime process and procedures, as agreed in the 2008 Transit Protocol. Such 
measures are necessary to rebalance the transit legal customs regime on the export side, allowing better 
management of goods in transit exported from Ethiopia through Djibouti territory and port. This will help to better 
manage risk related to export transit, such as (tax evasion-VAT refund on exports, currency evasion, etc.).  
50. 2(b): Development of an OSBP at Guelileh border: This sub-component will finance (i) the construction of the 
Djiboutian portion of an OSBP at Guelileh border. Infrastructure will include office buildings and associated 
facilities based on architectural designs prepared with the support of the AfDB38; (ii) training and technical 
assistance to customs agents, transporters, clearing agents and members of the private sector to operationalize 
customs procedures and processes for OSBPs as already designed and planned for the Galafi OSBP; and (iii) 
support for coordinated management of the Ethiopia-Djibouti corridor including options for the creation of a 
transport and transit corridor management committee and its operationalization.  
51. 2(c): Upgrade the Djibouti customs automated systems. This sub-component will support: (i) technical assistance 
to finalize the upgrade of Djibouti Customs Management System from Automated System for Customs Data 
(ASYCUDA) World to a web-based system on the basis of the third phase (3 years) of technical support and training 
on ASYCUDA World by UNCTAD; (ii) introduction of a Cargo Targeting System (CTS) for anticipated risk 
management based on cargo manifests’ data. To improve efficiency of cargo clearance, the project will support 
the implementation of an electronic risk-based management system based on manifest data.  A risk-based system 
such as the CTS developed and implemented by the World Customs Organization (WCO) enables customs 
administrations to receive cargo manifests, bills of lading or airway bill data and systematically apply risk profiles 
to identify potentially high-risk consignments on import, export and transshipment. The CTS which could also be 
implemented jointly with Ethiopia Customs will enhance the capacity of the two countries to make cargo release 
 
38 Office buildings will be constructed to climate resilience and energy efficiency standards, including elements of green building design, 
sustainable operations, and renewable energy technologies depending on site conditions. Buildings require lighting, temperature control, 
and drainage facilities. Green building design can consider daylighting techniques such as using natural light to illuminate interior spaces 
through the strategic placement of skylights and windows and solar- and battery powered lighting; the use of passive solar heating and 
cooling techniques such as the location of windows, choice of construction materials and buildings color, use of shading through vegetation 
or designed overhangs, etc. Sustainable operations include the use of energy efficient lighting and nighttime ventilation. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 72  
     
 
decisions prior to the arrival of goods at the port. The project will financially support the purchase the CTS package, 
IT-hardware, software implementation and training to operationalize the system; and capacity building.  
Component 3: Institutional strengthening and capacity-building on road PBCs and project implementation 
support (Cost US$5 million equivalent of which US$5 million from IDA)  
52. This Component will finance the following activities: 
53. 3(a): Technical assistance in respect of the OPBRC: This sub-component will finance technical assistance to the 
GoD in the structuring and tendering of an OPBRC for the major rehabilitation works / upgrade of road sections 
along the southern corridor, the maintenance and the operation of the road including axle load control station(s). 
The OPBRC samples bidding documents developed by the WB39 will serve as a basis, allowing for an agile tendering 
process. It will also finance the monitoring of compliance by the contractors with the technical, performance and 
environmental/social criteria established in the OPBRC, as well as technical and social audits. Climate resilience 
considerations will be integrated in the operations and maintenance provisions for the corridor. The technical 
assistance will also include developing robust procedures and processes for the public authority to fund long-term 
rehabilitation and O&M contracts. The latter will require a broader road corridor analysis (beyond the sections to 
be intervened under Component 1) in order to secure sustainable funding mechanisms (including mobilizing toll 
collection revenues for the OPBRC). This sub-component will build on the findings from the pre-feasibility study 
of a PPP Scheme for the Djibouti-Ethiopian Border Road Corridor (P172970). The technical assistance will include 
in the structuring of the tender and the drafting of the contract (contractual obligations, incentive mechanisms 
and performance-based criteria, etc.) all the relevant points needed to address the links between the 
performance-based contractual approach and local communities, climate change and resilience, job creations 
(including 20 percent quotas for women40), road safety and occupational safety.  
54. 3(b): Institutional strengthening and capacity-building on road PBCs and on PPPs. This sub-component will finance 
capacity building support to road asset management under OPBRC and, to a larger extent, to output based 
contracts under public-private partnership modalities. This work will be carried out across all related public sector 
entities and will not necessarily be limited to DPCR and ADR. It will include (i) assistance in designing the 
institutional monitoring framework for PPP contracts, and (ii) capacity building to DPCR, ADR and the PPP Unit on 
output-based approaches, fiscal management linked to PBCs and more broadly to PPP schemes. It will also include 
capacity building and awareness raising on issues related to axle load control, road safety, climate change 
(adaptation / resilience and mitigation41) and, in line with international standards, gender in PPPs42. 
55. 3(c): Maximizing the Djibouti-Addis southern corridor’s development impacts for local communities. This sub-
component will finance (i) the design and implementation of programs aimed at preventing and reducing the 
impact of HIV/AIDS infection among communities, (ii) COVID-19 prevention campaign targeting the southern 
corridors’ users, (iii) literacy trainings for women addressing their specific needs (appropriate time and location, 
complementary services such as childcare, etc.) and, (iv) support to female labor force participation (in direct jobs 
 
39 
https://ppp.worldbank.org/public-private-partnership/library/sample-bidding-document-request-bids-rfb-works-roads-output-and-
performance-based-road-contracts-opbrc  
40 Based on available data (ILOSTAT 2017), women represent 5 percent of total workers (as employees or self-employed) in the industry 
profession (which includes construction and the type of jobs expected in project works).  
41 Capacity and awareness building at the institutional level will sensitize both DPCR and ADR to the impact of climate change on road 
infrastructure, effects on transportation and other usage patterns. Further, capacity-building will improve reporting to policymakers on 
climate-induced impacts, trends and potential mitigatory strategies, as well as knowhow to incorporate climate considerations as 
performance metrics into PBCs to ensure the viability and sustainability of assets and actuality of pricing. 
42 The World Bank, 2021. Applying a Gender Lens throughout the PPP Project Cycle. Available online: https://ppp.worldbank.org/public-
private-partnership/applying-gender-lens-throughout-ppp-project-cycle [Retrieved on October 27, 2021].  
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 72  
     
 
resulting from the project’s activities or indirect jobs through development of businesses along the corridors)43. 
The project will (a) support the implementation of GBV protocol/measures for border personnel and women, as 
well as GBV training and information sessions for both women and men, truck drivers, border personnel44 and (b) 
sensitize border security on the importance of allowing women to trade hassle-free. Activities will be in line with 
established guidelines45; focus groups will be held regularly to ensure the activities effectively target women’s 
needs. Communication and prevention campaigns will ensure maximum outreach and meeting 
information/knowledge needs of women and girls (through involvement of existing women’s groups and 
networks, use of inclusive and appropriate language and channels for communication). 
56. 3(d): Project management including performance monitoring and reporting. Project Coordination Unit (PCU) 
operating costs; and the competitive hiring of consultants, as needed, for support in project implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation and audits.  
Component 4: Contingent emergency response component (CERC) (US$0 million equivalent)  
57. Following an eligible crisis or emergency, the Borrowers may request the WB to re-allocate project funds to 
support emergency response and reconstruction. This component would draw from the uncommitted resources 
under the project from other project components to cover emergency response. A CERC Project Implementation 
Manual (PIM), acceptable to the WB, for the implementation of the Contingency Emergency Response Plan, will 
be prepared and constitutes a disbursement condition for this component.  
C. Project Cost and Financing 
58. The total project cost is US$90 million, with financing from US$56 million from Regional IDA, US$14 million from 
National IDA Performance Based Allocation (PBA), US$3 million from the private sector, and a contribution from 
the GoD for US$17 million covered by the toll revenues. The resettlement costs estimated in the Resettlement 
Policy Frameworks (RPF) are about US$140,000 equivalent and will be fully funded by the GoD. The project costs 
are summarized in the cost tab below. 
 
 
 
43 Based on catchment area of the corridor it is expected that around 50 women would benefit from new income-generating activities in 
cross-border / small trade due to project interventions 
44 By providing explicit GBV training coupled with improvements in infrastructure conditions for small border trade, adoption of strong 
regulations related to safety and support of childcare services in addition to incorporation of specific measures that combat and respond 
to SEA/SH, project activities contribute to GBV mitigation, prevention and response. 
45 For example: COMESA, 2018. Framework for the Comprehensive Support for Women and Youth Cross Border Traders in the COMESA 
Region. 27 p. Available online: https://www.comesa.int/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/ENG_Comprehensive-Framework-for-the-Support-
of-Women-and-Youth-Cross-border-Traders.pdf [Retrieved on October 27, 2021]. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 72  
     
 
Table 2: Indicative costs and financing 
Project Components 
Costs 
(US$, 
millions) 
IDA 
GoD 
PCM 
Component 1: Improvement of infrastructure and introduction of intelligent 
transportation systems along the Djibouti-Addis southern corridor in Djibouti 
80.00 
60.00 
17.00 
3.00 
1(a): Rehabilitation and upgrade of road sections along the southern road corridor and 
logistics infrastructure (OPBRC) 
58.00 
 
58.00 
 
 
 
1(b): Smart corridor through the deployment of ITIS (included in the OPBRC) 
2.00 
2.00 
 
 
1(c): Maintenance and operation of the corridor (included in the OPBRC) 
20.00 
 
17.00 
(secured 
through 
the toll) 
3.00 
(secured 
through 
the toll) 
Component 2: Improvement of transit services along the corridor 
5.00 
5.00 
 
 
2(a): Enhancement of Customs Transit Procedures 
0.50 
0.50 
 
 
2(b): Development of an OSBP at Guelileh border 
3.00 
3.00 
 
 
2(c): Strengthening of Djibouti customs automated systems 
1.50 
1.50 
 
 
Component 3: Institutional strengthening and capacity-building on road PBCs and 
project implementation support 
5.00 
5.00 
 
 
3(a): Technical assistance for OPBRC  
1.00 
1.00 
 
 
3(b): Institutional strengthening and capacity-building on road PBCs and on PPPs 
1.00 
1.00 
 
 
3(c): Maximizing the corridor’s development impacts for local communities 
1.00 
1.00 
 
 
3(d): Project and Corridor management including corridor performance monitoring and 
reporting 
2.00 
2.00 
 
 
Component 4 – CERC 
0.00 
0.00 
 
 
Base cost total (US$, millions) 
90.00 
70.00 
17.00 
3.00 
 
D. Project Beneficiaries 
 
59. The project’s primary beneficiaries will be the local consumers and producers of tradable goods in Djibouti and 
its hinterland, the road transport sector service providers, the local traders, the populations living in the 
corridor area of influence, the end consumers, and the inland and seaport authorities that would benefit from 
increased trade volumes.  The main expected benefits of the project include: (i) reductions in transport time, 
trade friction costs and vehicle operating costs along the corridor; (ii) increase in cross-border trade between the 
countries; (iii) the stimulation of job opportunities and economic growth; and (iv) improved regional cohesion and 
stability due to the enhanced movement of goods and people across the region.  
60. The project supports the perspectives of Djibouti being a major port of transit for the entire Eastern and Central 
Africa region. In continuation of the Djibouti- Addis road and transit corridor, potential extension to South Sudan, 
Chad and then even the Sahel countries would make Djibouti a major port of transit to serve the entire region and 
deeply contribute to the African continental integration as envisaged by the African Union and the IGAD. 
61. The project will also benefit Djibouti public institutions in the transport sector. This will include: (i) DPCR and 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 72  
     
 
ADR; and (ii) the recently created PPP unit in the Ministry of Finance (MoF). They will benefit from Institutional 
strengthening and capacity-building on road PBCs as well as TA aimed at strengthening the private sector 
involvement in the infrastructure sector in Djibouti, as part of component 3. 
62. The project will finance activities specifically designed to benefit women and will seek to reduce some of the 
gender gaps identified in the country. Under component 1 and 2, specific activities to be financed to address 
gender gaps will be structured with the support of the PCU. Low levels of literacy and lack of information and 
knowledge about cross border trade regulations and procedures tend to be more prevalent among female than 
male traders. There are also likely more informal female traders. Specific activities to be financed will be selected 
in close consultation with women to address any gender specific constraints linked to trade border crossing/ 
transit procedures and transport infrastructure. To ensure citizens are engaged and enable a feedback loop, the 
project will conduct a survey during the first six months of the project to collate baseline data. The surveys will 
either generate an annual, timebound action plan to address comments received through the surveys, or publish 
the findings of each survey to foster transparency and potential for debate and engagement around the surveys’ 
results. Afterwards, surveys will be administered on a yearly basis to monitor the project’s progress and impacts. 
Focus groups will be conducted with female and male beneficiaries once a year to ensure the project’s activities 
fully benefit them. Building on the MENA Gender Strategy pillars, this project will support concrete actions 
enabling an economic empowerment for women by addressing literacy and knowledge gaps to give women the 
tools to enter the labor force or small business ownership. This project will also contribute to give men and women 
equitable access to jobs through road construction and maintenance contracts. The actions proposed within the 
project could provide both short- but also long-term socio-economic benefits for women and their households46. 
The project will improve conditions for small border trade by (a) improving the infrastructure leading to reduced 
congestion and delays in transportation of goods, thus fewer perishable goods will be destroyed during 
transportation to the border which would decrease female traders’ cost of doing business, (b) improving border 
regulations such as removing ad-hoc fees, excessive delays and document requirements, (c) supporting child care 
services at the border area for female traders with children enabling more time constraint parents to engage in 
cross-border trade, (d) developing capacity through trade training of female traders on the cross border 
procedures, tariffs, rules and regulations, and (e) promoting the creation of female-owned small businesses 
through tailored entrepreneurship training programs on setting-up a business for cross-border trade along the 
corridor. 
63. The project contributes to climate mitigation and enhances the climate resilience of the transport network and 
communities by investing in rehabilitation of roads to meet climate resilience standards. In accordance with 
climate resilience standards, the project will rehabilitate sections of the strategic road corridor and supplementary 
infrastructure will be deployed to enhance resilience to flooding, such as bridges and drainage systems observing 
climate resiliency standards. Fences and other stabilization techniques will be deployed to reduce dune 
encroachment on road infrastructure (Component 1). The project will: (i) support the establishment of 
information systems that provide alerts on climate and natural hazard emergency events and response measures, 
to ensure the fluidity of transit and address disruptions that may occur due to dune encroachment, dust storms, 
and other eventualities in a timely manner (Component 1); and (ii) build capacity in the O&M of the road network 
including in emergency planning and response (Component 3).  
64. The project addresses the GRID approach responding to the twin crises of the COVID-19 pandemic and climate 
change in the context of ongoing challenges of poverty and inequality. The project contributes to the recovery 
 
46 While it is difficult to measure the impact of employment beyond the project life cycle, it is anticipated that the experience and skills 
developed will contribute to future opportunities. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 72  
     
 
path of Djibouti maintaining a line of sight to long-term development goals, recognizing the interconnections 
between people, the planet, and the economy, and tackling risks in an integrated way. Aligned with the GRID 
approach, it promotes growth through creation of green technologies and investments in a balanced approach 
focusing on development and sustainability, tailored to both countries’ recovery needs. 
E. Results Chain 
65. The project aims to alleviate two major constraints to the regional integration of Djibouti within the HoA region 
and beyond: (a) inefficient, non-resilient and unsafe road connectivity along the Djibouti-Addis corridor, resulting 
in high transport and logistical costs; and (ii) challenging tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade. Improving transport 
connectivity on the Djibouti-Addis corridor is expected to spur economic growth and reshape the economic 
geography of the country. The achievement of the expected outputs from the project will contribute to longer 
term development outcomes for the country and the HoA. The desired project impacts on development outcomes 
are on economic welfare (e.g., income, wages, and consumption, land value appreciation), social inclusion (jobs, 
underserved communities, gender), equity (poverty and inequality), environmental quality (pollution, 
preservation of flora and fauna), economic resilience and resilience to the damaging effects of climate change 
(e.g., droughts, floods, and landslides). A strong emphasis is put on gender aspects, especially ensuring women 
access to economic opportunities (jobs). Figure 6 below illustrates the Theory of Change (ToC). 
66. The project will achieve these long-term development outcomes by taking a holistic approach to regional 
integration and trade connectivity.  The assumption underlying the project’s theory of change is that improving 
regional connectivity and enhancing logistics efficiency along the Djibouti Regional corridor will help stimulate the 
country’s economy as well as the local economy by helping to generate Wider Economic Benefits—such as growth 
of income and consumption, poverty reduction, and creation of new jobs and economic opportunities, especially 
for women. The combination of components selected for the project reflects the integrated approach which is 
likely to yield large gains to the economy. To achieve the improvement of regional integration and enhance 
logistics efficiency both (i) the road connectivity along the corridor (which is improved under component 1) and 
(ii) the facilitation of trade and logistics (which is improved under Component 2) need to be addressed. 
Component 3 strengthens the sustainability of the road corridor investment and the ability of the country to 
deliver and maintain on the investments envisioned under Component 1, and to build its capacity to deliver on 
other transport initiatives beyond the project. These benefits can become more salient in the event of a natural 
disaster or pandemic when enabling the seamless movement of necessary supplies is paramount. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 72  
     
 
Figure 6: Theory of Change 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 72  
     
 
 
F. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners 
 
67. The proposed project is a key priority among the HoA Initiatives supported by the countries as critical for their 
economic development and regional integration. The WBG has been working with the GoD and HoA countries 
and has played a critical convening role through the HoA initiative, bringing the countries together to define 
commonly agreed and mutually beneficial development agendas. This project is a platform for commitment at 
corridor level, dialogue, collaboration, and problem solving. Governments of the HoA including Djibouti and 
Ethiopia are aware of the benefits that accrue to them for the corridor interventions and the SOPs operations are 
funding contiguous road corridors with aligned objectives. 
68. Project implementation is expected to enhance the Government’s capacity for Maximizing Finance for 
Development (MFD) and to result in pilot Private Capital Mobilization (PCM). The OPBRC contract to be financed 
by the project, is expected to generate, once awarded, an estimated US$3 million of PCM as this investment will 
be required from the private sector towards component 1(c) and is likely to be mobilized in the form of commercial 
financing by the selected construction firm (including for tangible investment to be carried out for the purchase 
and/or leasing of equipment to be used for maintenance post-construction). This amount will be recouped by the 
construction firm from tolls managed by the GoD. More details on PCM calculation are given at the end of Annex 
5. In terms of intangible MFD benefits, the project, as an innovative pilot for roads in Djibouti, aims to develop 
lessons learned and expertise which could be replicable and scalable in a more sustainable manner to road 
corridor projects in the country, including by testing non-conventional contracting modalities and assessing the 
benefits of the proposed approach compared to the conventional methods of road construction and maintenance 
in the Djiboutian context. 
69. The proposed project is also complemented by work of other DPs. As mentioned earlier, the AfDB, the EU and 
COMESA are working on trade facilitation initiatives including at the border posts, and on institutional capacity 
building and reforms, among other interventions. On the road corridor infrastructure, the project will complement 
the sections rehabilitated with the support of the UE, JICA and Saudi funds. 
G. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design 
 
70. Economic corridor vs. transport corridor: In line with the Africa Transport Strategy (2019) and the WBG’s Regional 
Integration and Cooperation Strategy update (2021-2023), the project’s design is based on a holistic approach to 
corridors or “second generation” regional corridor operations. The project aims at unleashing the economic 
potential along transport and trade corridors, combining support for infrastructure as a network (including smart 
corridor technologies) with trade facilitation consideration. Trade facilitation measures are expected to make 
border crossing, faster, easier, and less costly. In many countries, the evidence shows border crossing and other 
logistic costs could undermine in some cases the benefits of travel time reduction.  
71. Trade facilitation and customs reforms cannot be tackled in a single operation and take time and concerted 
efforts. While IPF operations have been successful in providing the needed infrastructure, equipment, training, 
and policy dialogue platforms, they are not ideal instruments for implementing reforms. Experience has shown 
that concerted efforts supported over a medium and long period through a combination of instruments and by 
various Global Practices within the WB (e.g. Trade and Regional Integration along with Transport) can bring 
sustainable results.  
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 72  
     
 
72. Road and transport systems should follow people-centered designs - with important gender, poverty, and youth 
considerations - to maximize their effectiveness and to properly serve their intended users. Infrastructures are 
built for users, and for the transport of goods and people. Assessing the characteristics of the intended users and 
disaggregating the collected data by gender, income group, and age group helps to better design these systems 
to serve these users. Women are typically excluded from road sector jobs and often suffer from discrimination 
and/or SEA/SH, and it is important to consider measures to further increase women participation in the road 
sector labor force and its supply chain. Road investments should also aim to improve the access to markets and 
services for the poor, while also creating important employment and training opportunities for the poor and low 
skilled. 
73. The use of OPBRC contracts can contribute to improve road asset management and enhance sector efficiency. 
An OPBRC modality has been proposed as a pilot for the corridor, drawing upon best practice in crowding in 
private sector investment and expertise – both for mitigating funding issues and for supporting higher-quality 
infrastructure. The OPBRC modality expands the role of the private sector from the simple execution of works to 
the longer-term management and maintenance of road assets. The contractor is paid by the Government through 
performance-based lump-sum payments for bringing the road to a mutually agreed service level and then 
maintaining it at that level, increasing the lifecycle of the road. The contractor usually finances a share of the 
works, which will be recouped over the term of the contract through the lump sum payments. This provides an 
incentive for the contractor to deliver better quality road improvement works and perform timely and adequate 
routine and periodic maintenance works. The role of the implementing agency is typically to enforce the contract 
by verifying compliance with the specified performance indicators and service levels and with all applicable 
legislation and regulations. Based on lessons learned from international experiences, given the innovative nature 
of this modality for Djibouti, the capacity of the implementing agency will be strengthened, and operational and 
technical support will be provided as part of the project. 
74. Lessons have been learned from existing projects on how to better manage against SEA/SH risks and to mitigate 
against occupational health and safety, and road safety fatalities, and these best practice measures will be 
applied in this project as well. Proper measures to safeguard against SEA/SH risks will be put in place such as the 
awareness campaigns for workers, the inclusion of SEA/SH clauses in works contracts, use of codes of conduct for 
all workers, the mobilization of GBV service providers, and the development of grievance committees and review 
of referral pathways. On safety, important lessons have been learned on the need for proper fencing and 
protection of borrow pits and quarry sites from public intrusion, dedicated review of provision of road safety signs, 
barriers and other road safety protection measures in road projects, use of speed limiting humps during 
construction in populated sections along the road, preparation of Occupational Health and Safety (OHS), road 
safety and traffic management plans by the contractors cleared by the monitoring consultants, review of 
adherence to OHS and road safety practices including audits by the road authority, and integration of a third-party 
consulting firm to review and report on performance on social and environmental management in road projects.

A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
75. ADR will be the lead agency for the implementation of the project and will have project coordinating and 
implementation functions liaising with other key beneficiaries of the project (DPCR and Djibouti Customs). The 
Ministry of Infrastructure and Equipment (MoIE) will be the line ministry of the project and will have overall 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 72  
     
 
responsibility for all project related activities. The overall institutional structure of the project will be composed 
of: (i) an Inter-ministerial Project Steering Committee led by the MoIE that ensures the coherence of activities 
with the sectoral strategy and intersectoral coordination for sub-components under the responsibility of other 
ministerial departments and local authorities; and (ii) PCU within ADR under the MoIE to ensure the coordination 
of project implementation. Further details are provided in Annex 1. 
76. The PCU will be responsible for fiduciary management, gender-related and M&E of project activities. Capacity 
building has already started for the institutions involved in the project preparation, in particular management and 
technical staff at ADR and DPCR. The PCU will be strengthened in terms of the fiduciary skills (financial 
management (FM) and procurement) and the technical skills needed to manage the project, including the ability 
to monitor the implementation of ESF, gender activities and GBV, and the project performance through the results 
framework. The PCU will be composed of the following specialists: a project coordinator, an FM and 
administration specialist, an internal auditor, a procurement specialist, a M&E specialist, an environmental 
specialist, a social specialist, a gender and GBV specialist, a communication specialist and an accountant, as well 
as the necessary technical specialists and support staff. The low capacity of ADR will be mitigated through 
competitive recruitment of personnel familiar with WB financed projects, and training. While the PCU in ADR will 
retain overall fiduciary responsibility for the project, Supporting Implementing Agencies (SIAs) will implement the 
various project activities which fall within their respective institutional mandate. For instance, DPCR will oversee 
subcomponents 1(b) and 1(c) while Customs will oversee the improvement of border crossing facilities, processes, 
and transit procedures of Component 2.  (see Annex 1). The PCU will be established prior to credit effectiveness 
along with a Project Implementation Support Agreement between ADR and DPCR by which DPCR will commit to 
allocate and transfer to ADR sufficient resources to cover the costs of implementing component 1.3. 
77. A PIM will be prepared for the project and will be a condition for effectiveness. The PIM will outline the internal 
procedures to be followed by the implementing agencies in relation to FM, procurement management, ESF, M&E 
and reporting mechanisms. The PIM will also include the requirement to include interventions to improve climate 
resilience. In addition, Contingency Emergency Response Manual will be developed and included in the PIM annex 
to prescribe detailed implementation arrangements for Component 4. 
78. Collaboration between Djibouti and Ethiopia authorities, as well as with other regional partner countries under 
the HoA Initiative will remain critical in the project implementation. MoF will play a critical leadership and 
coordination role both during project preparation and implementation. The project will support coordination 
between Djibouti and Ethiopia, especially as pertains to the trade facilitation elements under Component 2 on 
Trade Facilitation.  
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
 
79. Project results monitoring and evaluation will be carried out by the PCU with inputs from other beneficiary 
agencies and bodies like DPCR and the Customs. The PIM will elaborate the details and specifics of the 
institutional and implementation arrangements, including monitoring and evaluation activities. Most of the 
monitoring data will come out of the reports of the project management and supervision consultants under 
Component 1. Agencies will report on the progress with their individual activities under the components 2 and 3. 
80. ADR is expected to file four quarterly implementation progress reports each year and one comprehensive 
annual monitoring and evaluation report. Quarterly reports will summarize progress and issues related to 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 of 72  
     
 
procurement, FM, implementation of activities, social and environmental risk and impact management, and 
results monitoring. The focus of the quarterly reports is to enable communication that supports problem 
identification and resolution. The format of the quarterly reports will be defined by the PCU, and the quarterly 
reports will include updates on project results indicators and further updates when such information is readily 
available. The PCU will also administer satisfaction surveys to inform the project implementation, and eventually 
improve it. The quarterly reports will present results of the satisfactions surveys. The PCU will file an annual 
progress review report (a) outlining yearly implementation progress of the project and whether project 
implementation progress is satisfactory; (b) identifying risks, lessons, and changes to improve implementation; (c) 
summarizing progress toward achievement of the Results Framework and PDOs; (d) outlining a prospective view 
of the likelihood of achieving the outcomes and PDOs by project closing; and (e) outlining steps to improve the 
project’s impact and sustainability. 
81. In addition to the project level monitoring and evaluation in the short term, there is also need for medium- and 
long-term evaluation for the entire corridor once its upgrade is completed. Given the importance of such a 
corridor with significant construction cost in relevance to country’s GDP, and its expected transforming effects for 
the trade and mobility of goods and people, detailed monitoring and follow up is needed right from project design, 
through implementation and operation. Quantifying the benefits of a project of national and regional importance 
is a high priority. Funds will be sought, via trust fund application, during project implementation by the WB team 
to finance an Impact Evaluation study of such an important project intervention, with baselines to be collected 
before civil works are initiated, and follow-up surveys undertaken after the project is completed. 
C. Sustainability 
 
82. The proposed project has embedded in its design factors which are critical to the sustainability of its 
development objectives, through effective road asset management. In particular, providing solutions that ensure 
the sustainability of the road assets is a critical element of the project given the track record of lack of effective 
road maintenance in Djibouti. Component 3 of the project proposes to introduce integrated approaches in which 
the private company is in charge of both the design-build (or the rehabilitation and improvement works) and the 
operations and maintenance of the assets. One modality consists of the OPBRC, also referred to as performance-
based contracts (PBC) or CREMA contracts from their Latin-American acronym. The PBC approach incorporates 
several mechanisms to sustainably rehabilitate and maintain the infrastructure, to help the Government 
transitioning from traditional Engineering, Procurement and Construction and O&M procurement methods to 
more integrated approaches.  The private sector partner will be incentivized to design and build the road assets 
considering a longer horizon than just the one of construction milestones. It has an incentive to undertake 
preventive maintenance measures, and incorporate climate-resilient and adaptation measures in the design and 
maintenance programs. The public authority will learn how to manage performance-based contracts. Moreover, 
the handover requirements at the contract expiry will open the path for further private sector participation, 
through a new procurement process (either for another PBC, or for longer term public-private partnership 
approaches). The Project will reinforce the capacity of the public authority to monitor the performance on a 
continuous basis during the construction and operation phase, preferably through capacity building, to be 
eventually complemented by engaging an international consulting firm as an independent engineer to assist the 
public authority in that role.  
83. PBC contracts being based on availability payments, fiscal sustainability will constitute one key challenge of the 
OPBRC modality, through an increased pressure on the GoD’s capacity to honor its payments to the private 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 of 72  
     
 
sector partner. PBC contracts having a mid-term duration (5-7 years, sometimes up to 10 years) compared to 
long-term PPP contracts (25-30 years), a successfully managed OPBRC contract will contribute to incrementally 
build credibility and trust towards private sector operators and investors. It will send positive signals such as 
effective axle load enforcement, availability of the road and quality of service for the users, and timely payments 
to the operator. This requires though to structure a model in which availability payments are secured, and the 
client has confirmed that it would be possible to mobilize funding from toll collection, for instance through an 
escrow account which cascade of payments gives priority to the contractor.  
84. Climate resilient mitigation measures are embedded in the project activities. Road rehabilitation and upgrades, 
drainage facilities, parking and rest areas will observe climate resilient design standards namely: (i) climate change 
impacts on roads due to extreme temperatures include deformation of the surface, cracking, accelerated aging of 
binder, rutting of asphalt and bleeding/flushing of seals. The counter measures entail, for example, the use of 
appropriate layer coefficients, drainage coefficients, weather-resistant pavement surfacing materials and asphalt 
mix designs and revised pavement thicknesses which take into consideration the future temperatures. The 
construction of drains and culverts will accommodate for heavy precipitation and flash floods water flows. The 
refurbishment and development of border post facilities will use energy efficient materials and building 
specifications that enable reduction of energy consumption. Tree plantation will be conducted along the roadway 
to offer protection of road and drainage system from erosion and will be considered along walking infrastructure, 
near border posts, parking and rest areas, to offer shade and cooling effect. To support regional data sharing and 
IT integration into the systems of the relevant trade institutions and ministries, the following climate resilience 
and mitigation measures will be considered (i) use of energy efficiency improvement in lighting, appliances, and 
equipment (e.g: Computers), including energy-management systems, and (ii) deployment of provisions for data 
recovery and backup to prevent data loss in the event of climate disaster

A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis  
 
Technical analysis 
85. The technical analysis of the road sections to be rehabilitated on the southern corridor was undertaken in the 
feasibility study on the Djibouti-Ethiopia road corridor PPP (P172970).  In the absence of country specific design 
standards, the design used the French guidelines of “Aménagement des Routes Principales” (Designing of main 
roads) dated August 1994. Rehabilitation works consist of the following:   
• 
Section 1: RN1 from Djibouti-city to Arta (21 km): addressing punctual deteriorations and geometrical 
improvements of the existing two-lane from outside Djibouti city (PK12) to Arta (PK30) to ease congestion 
and road safety issues. This include widening of existing platform, earthworks, foundation and base 
courses, longitudinal ditches, prolongation of existing culverts or demolition/reconstruction of culverts, 
surface course on whole profile, road marking and signaling. 
• 
Section 2: 
o RN5 from the RN1 junction to Ali Sabbieh (12 km): heavy rehabilitation, earthworks, construction 
of culverts and longitudinal ditches, foundation, base and surface courses, construction of two 
roundabouts, road marking, signaling and accessories, construction of sidewalks in Ali Sabbieh. 
 
The World Bank 
 
Horn of Africa Initiative: Djibouti Regional Economic Corridor (P174300) 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 of 72  
     
 
o RN19 (9 km): geometrical improvements of the existing road to address road safety issues 
including widening of the existing 6m-wide platform, earthworks, foundation and base courses, 
longitudinal ditches, prolongation of existing culverts or demolition/reconstruction of culverts, 
surface course on whole profile, road marking and signaling and accessories. 
• 
In all sections, works will include drainage facilities and walking infrastructure and crosswalks in 
urban/settlement areas along the corridor. 
86. The RSSAT model was applied to assess the road safety impact of the proposed rehabilitation of the two 
sections of the corridor, detailed above.  Given the lack of relevant granular data, efforts focused on collecting, 
verifying, processing and coding data from various sources and based on good practices. Up-to-date data provided 
by DPCR on road traffic injuries, the engineering pre-feasibility design studies, WHO estimates (2018) as well as 
speed and traffic data from Highway Development and Management Model (HDM-4) were used. For each section 
of the corridor, the estimated PSI score was calculated. The PSI scores for section 1 and section 2 are respectively 
0.84 and 0.77. The average estimated PSI of the project is 0.80. This result is just a reference PSI for the base 
designs that were provided for information. For each section of the corridor, the road safety cost was calculated 
as well. To ensure a good final outcome, road safety is embedded in the performance criteria and service levels 
under the OPBRC. Contractors are required to deliver detailed designs improvements to meet a PSI of less than 1 
unless approved by the Government for certain locations only and to also include performance indicators on the 
road safety management (such as speed reduction enforcement) to meet the 30% fatalities reduction target. The 
road safety will be an integral and critical part of the OPBRC.  The base designs include innovative safety design 
features such as: central hatching in the median along both sections to reduce head-on crashes, saf